mmi^^ csjEntis)
SiCNALS &

SIC

ñ

ñ ITI#

2 ttfe
^^:
A

ALAH V. OPPENHEIH ALAN S. W1LLSKY
WITH S. HAMID MAWAB
m^Ý ^ #'iÝi lÝ - PRENTICE HALL

SECOND EDITION
Signals & systems
Alan V. Oppenheim Alan S . Willsky
Massachusetts Institute Technology
with
S. Hamid Nawab
Boston University
Prentice-Hall International, Inc.

,
Signals and systerrLS 2nd etl. /Alan V. Oppetiheirri, Alan S. Willsky with S. Hamid
ˋ Copyright 1997 by .Man V.OppenLdm and Alan S. Wilhky
Oxigmal English Lan^age Edition Piiblislic>d by Prentice- Hall, Inc,
All Rights Reserved. FoT sale in Mainland China Oorilv
^l^^^fJSSl^ Prentice Hall ;i|JK ft ^gferF*f^A^.'{|lS*Ýt:^ 3:^1*^ (^fa
Jt.^^: r|j Sfe^^j *ft--^3i<4 M^tl!U ; 01-98-2893
iTi^^^^Mz ^i/|^*tft4Ï(Oppenheim. A, V. )^=:t - 2 Ife. -:itM:¨
ISRN 7-302-03058-8
1 . f^-" n.M-^ IG- &^mit-^X IV.TN911.2 +^a,tK^^45tgClPSSCi^1^r-(98)^ 21433 ^
bttp:// -wTv^. tup. tsiKghua. edu. en
Jf :4^: 850 X 1168 t/32 6p^ : 30.75
K ^: 1999^1 nmim 1999^' i2^^2^^gtj
^5 -^; ISBN 7 302 -03058-8/TN' 97
È|3 ^: 5001 -10000
^ j^z 44.00 7C

hB KS ai! "t m'-^X^iim^Ý ^ Prentice Hall aijK^VfJl -^f^ffitl} &^"A-=T^it

nmx ^ ^ ^ ^ ^^ * 7 ^iu if f/r , #ts

->¨ ^T- an ^ii^ . -^ fn

fli

. ft

PreniiccHall Hlfei^pJ 1998.12

Acknowledgments

In producing this jiec;ond edition we were fortunate to receive the assistiince of jnary col-

We leagues, students, and fiierids who were extremely generous with their time.

express

our deep appreciation to:

Jon Maira and Ashok P^pot for their help jn generming many of the figures aiid iniages. Babak .\yazifar and Austin Frakt For their help in updating and assembling the bibli£g-
mphy.
Hamamurthy Mani for preparing the solution^ manual for the te\t find fnj hi>i lielp in general;ing many of the figures.
MJchad Daniel for coordinating and managing the LaTeX files as the various drafts o^
the second edition were being produced and modified.
John Buck f^>r his thorough reading of the entiire drafi of this second e<Iitioti. Robert Becker, Sally Beniiis, Maggie Beucler, Ben Halpem, Jon Maira, Chirsig Paid.
and Jerry VVeinstein for their efforts in producing the various LaTeX drafts of the
book.

And to all who helped in careful reviewing of the page proofs:

Babak Ayazifar Richard Barron
Rebecca Bates George Bevis Sarit Birzon Nabi) Bitar
Anne Findlay
Austin Frakt
Siddhartha Cupta
Chii^toforos Hadjicostiis
Terrence Ho
Mark Ibanez Seema Jaggi
Patrick Kreidl

Christina Lamarre Nicholas Laneman Li I^e Sean Lindsay Jeffrey T, Ludwig Seth Pappas Adrienne Prahler Ryan Riddols Sekhar I^tikonda Shavm Verbout
Kathh^n Wage Alex Wang
Joseph Winograd

XIV

Preface
This book IS the second edition of a text designed tor undergraduate courses in sjgnals and systems. While ñiuch murses are frequently fjvird in ekctrical engiTieering tLLnicuIa, the concepts and techniques that form the core of the subject are of fundamental importance in all engineering disciplines. In fact, ihe scope of potemial and actual applications of the methods nf signal and system analysis continues to ej^pand as engineers are confronted
with new challenges involving the synthesis or analysis of complex proees.^es. For these reasons we feel that a course in signaU and systems not only is an essenttal eknicnt in
an engineering program bul also can be one of the most rewarding, exciting, and useful
courses that engineering students take during theirundei^gradiiate education.
Our treatment of the SiJbject of signals and systems in this second edition Tnaintains the same genera] philosophy as in the first edition but with significant rewriiing, restructuring, and addilions. These changes are designed to help both the instructor in presenting the subject material and the student in mastering it. In the preface to the first edition we stated that our tivera.!] approach to >ignaLs and systems had been guided by the continuing dcvclopjnents in technologies for signal and system design and implementation, which made it
increasingly importanT for a student to have equal famihanty with techniques suitable for
analyzing and synthesizing both continuous-time atid discrete-time systems. As we write
the preface to this second edition, that fjbs.ervaiioTi and guiding principle are even tnore true than before. Thus, while students studying signals and systems ihould certainly have a solid foundation in disciplines based on the laws of physics, they must also have a firm grounding in the use of computers for the analysis i>f phenomena and the implementation
of sysietns and algorithms. As a consequence, engineering curricula now reflect a hlend of subjects, some involving continuous-time mc-dels and others focusing on the use of com-
puters and discrete representations. For these rtiasons, signals and systems courses that bring discrete-lime and continuous-titne concepts together in a unified way play an in-
creasingly important role mthe edjcation of engineering students and in their preparation
for current and future developments in their chosen fields.
It is with these goals in mind that we have structured this book to develop in parsJlel
the methods of analysis for continuous-time and discrete-time signils and systems. This appn^ach also offers a distinct and extremely important pedagogical advantage. Specifi-
cally, we are able to draw on the similarities between continuous- and discrete-time methods in order to share insights and intuition developed in each domain. Similarly, we can
exploit the diflcrcnces between them to sharpen an understanding of the distinct properties
of each.
In organizing the material both originally and now in the second edition, we have
also considered it es^i^ntiai to introduce the student to some of the important uses of the basic methods that are developed in the book. Mot only does this provide the student with an appreciation for the range of applications of the Lechniques being learned and for diiiections for further study, but il alst^i helps to deepen understanding of the subject To
achieve this gfial we include introductory treatments on the subjects of ftUering. commu-

jcvi

Preface

mcatioii, samplinji.dLSCfetJ^-iiTiioprocessmg of continuous-rime &iÈnab. and feedback, i\\
factj in one of tht majoi ohiini^es in this second edition, we have introduced the concept
m m of freqjency-tlnmain filtering very earJy oiir Treatment of Founer analysis Girder to
provide both mrtiiviition ft^r niAd insigbt into this very importanv xopk. In addition, wc
ftave again ircludcd an up-Uj-date bibliography at the end of the book in order to a^isist the
student who js interested in pursuing additionnl and more advanced studies (if the (i:eihods
and applicaticjns of "ligns! andsy&tcm atialysis. The or^aniztitLOn ot the btMik reflects our convLciion that tuU mastery of a subject
{)f this ndturc cannot be accomplishcil without a significant amount of practice in using and applying the LlhjIs that are developed. Consequently, in the second edition we havt
significantly increased the nuini>erof worked examples within each chapter. We have ahn
enhanctd tsne of the key assets of the ftvsl edition, namely the end of-chapttr h{>mewi>rk problems. As in tiie iits;t edition, uo have included a substuntial number of pi£blemÈ,
totaling more than 600 in number. A majority of the problems included here are new and
thus pnivide additional flexibility for the instructor in preparing homework assignments.
In addition, in otdtr tti enhance the utility of the probieins for both the student and the
instructor wehave made a n timber of other chattges to the organization and presentjition of the problems In panicnlar, we have organized the problems in each chapter under several
specific headLtigs, each {if which spans the material in the entu^ chapter but with a different objective. The first two sectiov^s of problems in each chapter emphasize the mechanics of using the basic concepts and methods presented in ibe chapter. For the first of these two
sections, whlL:h has the heading Basic Problems with Answers, we have ajso provided
answers (but not solution^) at the end of the book. These answers provide a simple and
immediate way for the student to check his ot her londerAtanding of the material The problems in this first section are generally appropriate for inclusion in homework sets. Also, in order to give the instructor additional flexibility in assigning homework problems, we have provided a second section of Bssic Pjoblems for which answers have not been
included.
A third section of problems ia each chapter^ organizcd_iinder the heading of Ad-
vanced Probkmfi, is oriented toward exploring and elaboradng upon the foundations and practical implications of the niaterisl in the text. These pioblerns often involve niathemaiicai derivaiit>ns and more sophisticated use of the concepts and methods presented in
the chapter. Some chapters at.so include a section of Bxteiision Problems whit:h involve
extensions of material presented in tite chapter and/or invtdve the use of knowledge from applications that are outside the scope of the main text (such as advanced circuits or mechanical systerns). The overall variety and quantity of pn^bkms in each c^bapter will hopefully provide students with the means to develop their understanding of the material and in>tnjctors with considerable fle\ibility in putting together homework sets thai are tailored
A to the specific needs of their students. solutions manual is also available to mstmctors
through the publisher.
Another significant additional enhancement lt> this seetmd edition is the availability
of the compani{in book Explorations in Signah ^tnJ Systems Us^ing MATLAB by Buck.
Daniel, and Singer. This book contains MATI^ABÛ'-based computer exercises for each topic in the text, and should be of great assistance to btJth instructor and student
Stadents usin^ this book are assumed to have a basic background in calculus as well as some experience in manipulating complex numbers and some exposure to differential

Preface

xvii

e^uaiiuns. With this backgrnunci. the book is sdf-containeJ. 1ti particuiur, no priur expe-

rience Tvirh sysiem anal>sis, convolution, Fourier analysis, or Lapjaoe and ;- transforms is

assumed. Prior tn ieamirg the subject of steals and ^ystetris most studetits will have had

a course such as basic circuit theory for elcetrical engineers or fiindamcnials uf dynmiiics

for mechanical engineers. Such subjects touch on some of the basic idtas that arc devel-

oped more fully in this text. This backgn>LJnd c4n cleiuly be of great value to students in

providing additional perspective as they proceed through the book-

The Foreword, which foJlows this preface, is written to ¨ffier the reader n>otivaci<m

and perspective for the subject of sisals and systems in general and our trcaimeni of it

We in particular.

begin Chapter I by irtlr^>ilacing some qf the eletnentiiry ideas related to

the niathernatlcal representation of signals and systems. In particular we discuss transformatitins (*iuch as time shifts and scaling) of the independent variable ot a signal. We

also introduce some of the must important and basic continuous-lime and discrete-tijne

Signals, naTnely real and complex exponentials and the continuous-time and discrete- time

unit step and unit impulse. Chapter 1 also introduces block diagram representations of in-

terconnections of systems and discusses several basic system properties such as causality,
linearity and time iiivariance. In Chapter 2 wc build on these last two propertes, together

with the sifting property of unit impulses to develop the convolution -sum represeniatior

for discrete-time hneax, time-iti variant (L.T1) systems and the convolution mtcgral repre-

sentation for c continuous time LTl systems. In this treatment we use the intuition gained

from our development of the diKCrete-time case as an aid in deriving and understanding its

We continuous-time counterpart.

then turn to a discussion of causal, LTI systeitij; charac-

terized by linear constant-coefficient differential and difference equations. In this introduc-
toiy discussion we review the? hasic ideas involved in solving linear differential equation.s

(to which most students will have had some previous exposure) and we also provide a dis-

cussion of analogous methtids for linear difference equations. However, the primary focus of our developmenv in Chapter 2 is not on methods of solution, s;ince more convenient approaches are developed later using transform methods. Instead, in this first look, our intent

is to provide the student with some appreciation for these extremely impKortant classes of systems, which will bo encountered tjften in subsequent chapters, Pinally, Chapter 2 con-
-- cludes with a brief discussion of singularity functions steps, impulses, doublets, and so
-- fwnh in the context of Lheir role in the description and analysis of continuous-time LTl
systems. In particular, we stress the interpretatit^n of these signals in terms cf how they are denned under cc:nvolution^that is, in terms of the responses of LTl systems to these

idealized signals.

Chapters 3 through 6 present a thorough and self-contained development of the methods of Fourier analysis in both continuous and discrete time and together represent
we the most significant reorganization and revision iti the second editivin In partitiulgr, as indicated previously, we have introduced the concept of frequency- domain filtering at a
nnuch earlier point in the development in order t^ provide motivation for and a concrete apphcation of the Fourier methods being developed. As in the first edition, we begin the discussii^ns in Chapter 3 by emphasizing and illustratmg the two fundamental rcastms

for the important role Fourier analysis plays in the study of signals and systems in both continuous and discrete time: ( 1 ) extremeh broad classes of signals can be lepresentod as weighted sums at integrals cf complex exponentials; and (2) the response of an LTl system to a complcA exponenua) input is the same exponential multiplied by a complex-

xviii

preface

number characteristic of the system. However, in contrast to the first edition, the focus of attention in Chapter 3 is on Fourier series representations for periodic signals in both c^n-
tinaous time and discrete time. In this way we not only introduce and exammc many of the
properties of Fourier represftntations without the fidditionaZ mathematical generalization
required U^ obtain the Fourier transform for aperiodic signals, but we also can intiwluce
the application to filtering at a very early stage in the development. In particijiar, taking advantage of the fact that complex exponentials are eigenfunctions of LTl systems,
we introduce the frequency response of an LTl system and use it te discuss the concept
of frequency- selective filtering, tc introduce ideal filters, and to give several examples of uonideal filters described by diflTerential and difference equations. In this way, with a itiin-
inium of mathematical preliminaries, we provide the student *ith a deeper appreciation for whai a Fourier representation means and why it is such a useful construct.
Chapters 4 and 5 then build on the foundation provided hy Chapter 3 as wt develop
first the conrinuou^s-time Fourier transform in Chapter 4 and^ in a parallel fashion, the
discrete-time Foiuier transfotm in Chapter 5. In both chapters we derive the Fqurier trans-
form representation of an aperiodic signal as the limit of the Fourier series for a signai whose pcnod becomes arbitrarily lai^e. This perspective emphasizes the close relationship
between Fourier series and transforms, which we develop further in subsequerit sections
and which allows us to transfer the intuition developed foi Founer series in Chapter 3 to the
more genera] context of Fourier transforms. In both chapters we have included a discussion of the many important properties of Fourier transforms, with special emphasis placed
on the convolution and muldpUcation properties. In particular, the conv&Jutiori property allows us to take a second look at the topic of frequency-selective fihenng, while the mulLi plication property serves as the starting poitit for our treatment of sarnpling and mod-
m ulation in later chapters. Finally, the last sections in Chapters 4 and 5 we use transform
methods to determine the frequency responses of LTl systems described by differential and difference equations and to provide several examples illustrating how Fourier transforms can be used to compute the responses for such systems. To supplement these discussions {and later treatments of Laplace and ^-transforms) we have again included an Appondix at the end of the b[>ok that cofitains a description of the method of partial fraction expansion.
Our treatment of Fourier analysis in these two chapters is characteristic of the parallel treatment we have developed. Specifically, in our discussion in Chapter 5. we are
able to build on much of the insight developed in Chapter 4 for the continuous-time case, and toward the end of Chapter 5 we emphasize the complete duality in coniinijous-iime and discrtte-dme Fourier representations. In addition, we bring the special nature of each
domain into sharper focus by contrastii^ the differences between continuous- and discretetime Fourier analysis.
As those familiar with the Tirst edition will note, the lengths and scopes of Chapters 4 and 5 in the second edirion are considerably smaller than their ftrst edition counterparbi This is due not only to the fact that Fourier series are now deaU with in a separate chapter but also to our moving several topics into Chapter 6. Ttie result, we believe, has several
signittcant benefits. Firsts the presentation in three shorter chapters of the basic concepts and results of Fourier analysis, together with the introductitin at the concept of frequencyselective filtering, should help the student in oigardzing his or her understanding of this
material and in developing some intuition about the frequency domain and ^preciation
m for its petentia] appLcatiocis, Then, with Chapters 3-5 as a foundation, we can engage

Praface

^^^

a more detailed look at a number of important topics and appMcations In Cliapter 6 we

late a deeper look, at both the time- and frequency-domain characteristics af LTI systems.

Fcr example, we incroducc magnitude- phase and Bode plot representations for frequency

responses and discuss the effect of fr^iiency response phase on the time domain charac-

teristics of the ffutput of an LTI system, in addition, we exardne the time and frequency

tiomain behavior of ideal and notiideal filters and the tradeoffs between these that must be

We addrejtscd in practice

also take a careful look at fii\t- and second-crder systems £nd

their roka as basic building blocks for more complex system synthesis and analysis in both
continuous and discrete time. Finally, we disc:uss several other more complex examples

of filters in both cotitinuous and di^;crete time. Tl^ese examples together with the numer-

ous other aspects {)f filtering ej:plored in the problems at the end of the chapter provide

the student with some appreciation for the richness and flavor of this important subject.

While each ol the topics in Chapter 6 was present in the first edition* we believe that by

reorganizing and collecting them in a separate chapter followitig the basic development

of Fotiri&r analysis, we have both simplified the introduction of this important topic in

Chapters 3-5 and presented in Chapter 6 a considerably more cohei&ive picture of time-

and frequency-domain issues.

In response to suggestions and prefertncea expressed by many users of the first edition we have modified notation in the discussion of Fourier transrortns to be more con-

sistent with notation most typically used for continuous-time and discrete-time Fourier

transforms. Specifically^ beginning with Chapter 3 we now denote the continuous-time

Fourier transform as Xijat) and die discrete-time Fourier transform as XieJ"^). As with all

options with notation^ there is not a utiique best choice for the notation for Founer trans-

fortns. However, it is our feelings and that of many of our colleagues, that the ntimtion used

in this edition represents the preferable choice.

Our treatmcT^t of sampling in Chapter 7 is concemeti primarily with the sampling

theorem and its implications. However, to place this subject in perspecti ve we begin by dis-

ctjssing tfie general concepts of representing a contintaous-time signal in terms of its samples and the reconstruction of signals using interpolation. After using frequency-domain

methods to derive the sampling theorem, we consider both the frequency and time domains to provide intuition conccniing the phenomenon of aliasing resulting from uudersampling. One of the very impoftant uses of sampling is in the discictJe-time processing of continuous-time sigr^als, a topic that we explore at $onie length in this chapter Following this, we turn to the sampling of discretft-time sigrals. The basic result underlying discrete-
m time sampling is developed a manner that pariUlels that used in continuous time, and

the applications of this result to problems of decimadon and interpolation are described. Again a variety of other applications, in both continuous and discrete time, are addressed

in the problems.

Once again the reader acquainted with our firstedicion will note a change, in this case
involving the reversal in the order of the presentation of samphng and communications We

have chosen to place sampling before commurucaiions in the second edition both because
we can call on simple intuition to motivate and describe the processes of sampling^and

reconstruction from samples and also because this order of presentation then allows us

in Chapter 8 to talk more easily about forms of communicahon systems that ^je closely related to sampling or rely fundamentally on using a sampled version of the signal to be

transmitted.

XX Preface

Our treatment of communicatioiis in Chapter 8 includes an in-depth discussion of

continuous-time sinusoidal amplitude mydulation (AM), which begins with the straight-
AM forward application of the multiplication propeny to describe the effect of sinustiida]

in the frequency domain and to suggest how the oiiginal modulating signal can be recov-

ered. Following this, we develop a number of additional issues and applications related

to sinusoid^ moduJation, including frequency -division multiplexing and single sideban^l
modulation. Many other examples and applications are described in the prjblems. Several

additional topics are covered in Chapter 8. The first of these is amplitude modulation of

a pulse train and time-division multiplexing, which has a close connection to the topic of

sampling in Chapter 7. Indeed we make this tie even more explicit and provide a look into

the impoitant field of digital communications by introducing and briefly describing the

topics of pulse-amplitude modulation (PAM) and intersymbol interference. Finally, our

di^LcuRSion t>i frequency modulation (FM) provides the reader with a look at a nonlinear

FM moduladon problem. Althou^ the analysis of

systems is not as straightforward as for

AM the

case, our introductory treatment indicates how frequency-domain methods can

FM be used to gain a sigDihcant amount of insight into the characteristics of

signals and

systems. Through these discussions at^d the many other aspects of modulation and communicatio^ns explored in the problems in this chapter we believe that the student can gain

an appreciation both for the nchness of the field of comntiunications and for the central

role that the tools of signals and systems analysis play in it,

Chaptesrs 9 and 10 treat the Laplace and ^-trao$fonn&. respectively. For the most part,
we focus an the bilateral versions of these transforms^ although in the last section of each

chapter we discuss unilateral transfonns and their use in solving differential and differ-

ence equations with nonzero initial conditions. Both chapters include discussions on: the

close relationship beiween these transforms and Fourier transforms; the class of rational

transforms and their representation in terms of poles and zeros; the region of conveigence

of a Laplace or ^-transform and its relationship to properties of the signal with which it is associated; inverse transforms usmg partial fraction expansion; the geometric evaluation

of system funocions and frequency responses from pole-zero plots; and basic transform
properties. In addition, in each chapter we exaniine the properties and uses of system

functions for LTI systems. Included in these discussions are the determination of system

functions for systems characterized by differential and difference equations; the use of sys -

tern function algebra for interconnections of LTI systems; and the construction of cascade,

parallel- and direct-form block-diagratn representations for systems with rational system

functions.

The tools of Laplace and ^-transforms form the basis for our examination of linear
feedback systems in Chapter 11. We begin this chapter by describing a number of the

important uses and properties of feedback iiystems, including stabilizing unstable systems,

designing tracking systems, and reducing system sensitivity. In subsequent sectiauK we use the tools that we have developed in previous chapters to exatnine three topics that are of

importance for both continuous-time and discrete-time feedback s>stem&. These are root

locus analysis, Nyqnist ploL^ and tbo Nyqui si criterion, and log -magnitude/phase plots and

the concepts of phase and gain margins for stable feedback systemji. The subject of signals and systems is an extraordinarily rich one, and a varieiy of

approaches can be taken in designing an introductory course. It was our intention with

the first edition and again with this second edition to provide instructors with a great deal of

.

Preface

mci

flexibilily in slnictudrig their presentations or the subject. To obtain this flexibility and kT

maximize the usefulness of this biiok for instructoi^, we have chosen to present thorough^

in -depth treattnttits of a cohesive set of topics that forms the core of most inuoduciory

LOLiTses on sigriiils and systems. In achieving this depth we have of necessity omitted m-

troduciions to topics such as descriptions of randum signals and stale spaLt; models thatitre

sometimes included in first courses on signals and systems. Traditionally, aL manv schools,

such topics arc not included in introductory courses but rather are developed in more depth

in lollow-on undergraduate courses or in courses explicitly devoted to their investiiialLon.

Although we have rioi mcluded an intmduction to state space in the book, mstnictor^ of

introducu^ry courses can easily incorporate it into the treatments of differential and dif-

ference equations thai can be found throughout the book. Iti particular, the disLussions

in CKapters 9 and 10 on block diagram repiesentations for systems with rational system

functions and or unilateral transforms and their use in solving differential and dif^ort-nce

equations with initial cwnditions form natural points of departure for the discussiorts of

Slate-space representations.

A typical one-semester course at the sophomore-junior Icvei using this book would

cover Chapters 1-5 in reasonable depth (although various topics in each chapter are easily

omitted at the tjiscreiinn of the itistnictor) with selected topics chosen from the rcmair^ing

chapters. For example, one possihility is to present several of the bajiic topics in Chapters

6 -8 together with a treatmert of Laplace and ^-transforms and perhaps a brief introducaon

to the use of system function concepts to analyze feedback syslemK. A variety of alternate

fonnats arc possible, including one that incorporates an inaoduction to stale space or one in which more focus is placed on continuous-lime systems by de-emphasizmg Chapters 5 and to and the discrete- time topics in Chapters 3, 7, 8, and 1 1

in addition to these course fontiats this book can be used a^ the basic text for a

thorough, iwo-semesier sequence on line^u' systems Alternatively, the portions of the btiok

not used in a first course on signals and systems car, logedier vfith other sources, form the
basis for a -iubsequent course. For example, much of the material in this book forms adirect

bridge to subjects such as state space analysis, control systems, digital signal process.ng,

communications and statistical signal prctcessing. Consequently, a follow-on course can be

conscructed that uses some of the topics in this book together with supplementary material

in order to provide an introduction to one or more wf these advanced subjects. In fact, a
nevi^ course following this model has been developed at MIT and has pt\)vcn not onl> n,
be d popular course among our smdcnts but also a crucial cotnponent of our signals and
systems curriculum.

As it was with the first edition, in the process of writing this book we have been for-
tunaie to have received assistance, suggestions, and support from numerous colleagues,
students and friends. The ideas and perspectives that font\ the heart of this book have continued to evolve as a result of our own experiences in teaching signals and systems
and the inQusntes of the many colleagues and students with whom we have worked. We
T would like to thank Professor Ian Young for his contributions to the first edition of this
book and to thank and welcome Professor Hamid Nawab for the significant role he played

in the development and complete re';tructurine of the examples and problems for diis sec-

ond edition. We ahu express our appreciation to John Buck. Michaet Daniel and Andrew

MATLAB Singer for writing the

companion to the text. In addition, we would like to

thank Jason Oppenheim for die use of one of his original photographs and Vivian Bemian

XXll

Preface

^ for her ideas and help in arriving ai a. cover d&";ign. Als-o, indicated on the acknowl-
edgmenc page that follows, we are deeply grateful to the many students and colleagues

who devoted a significant numher of hours l:o a variety of aspecis of the preparation of thi.^

second edition.
We wouid also like to express our sincere thanks to N4r. Ray Stata and Analog De-

vices, Inc. for their generoMS and condnued suppqit of ."iignai processing and this texl
through funding of the Dvstingutshed t^fessor Chair in ELtctrical Engineering. We also

thank MJ.T. for providing support and an invigorating environment in which to develop

our ideas.

The encouragement, patience, technical support^ and enthusia.sm provided by

Prentice-Hall^ and in pHrticuW by Marcia Horton, Ibm Robbins, Don Fowley. and their

TKM predecessors and by R^ph Pescatore of

Productions and the production staff at

Prentice-Hall, have been crucial in making this second edition a reality.

Alan V. Oppenheim AlanS.WiUsky
Cambridge, Massachusetts

Foreword
The concepts of signals and systems arise in a wide variety of nelds, and the ideas and
techniqucK associated with these concepts play an important role in such diverse areas of science and technoJogy as communications, aeronautics and astronautics, circtiit design^ acoustics, seismology* biomedical engineering, energy generation Aiid distributi\)n systetns, chemical process control, and speech processing. Aithough the physical nature of
the signals and systems that arise in these various disciplines may be drastically differ&nt,
they all have two very basic features in common. The signals, which are functions of one or more independent variables, contain information about the behavior or nature of ^i^Jnc ffhenomenon, whereas the systems respond to particular signals by producing other signals or some desired behavior. Voltages and currents as a function of time in an electrical tirt:uit are examples of signals, and acircmt is itself an example of a system, which in this case responds to applied voltages ajid currents. As another example, when an automobile driver depresses the accelerator pedal, the automobile reijponds by increasing the speed of the vehicle. In thisi case, the system is the automobile, the pressure on the accelerator
pedal the input to the system, and the automobile speed the response. A computer program
for the automated diagnosis of electrocardiograms can be viewed as a system which has as its input a digitized electrocardiogram and which predoces estimates of parameters suth
A as heart rate as outputs. camera is a system that receives light from different sources A and reflected from objects and produces a photograph, robot arm is a system whose
movements are the response to control inputs. In the many contexts in which signals and systems arise, there are a variety of prob-
lems and questions that are of importance. In some cases, we are presented with a specific system and are interested in characterizing it in detail to understand how it will respond to
various inputs. Examples include the analysis of a circuit in order to quantify its response to different voltage and current sourue^i and the determination of an aircraft's response
characteristics both to pilot commands and to wind guais. In other problem.^ of .sjgnal and sysiem aaalysi^, rather than an^yzing existJng sys-
tenis£ our interest may be focused on dcijigning systems lo process signals in piirticular ways_ One very comncion context in whicti such problems arise is in the design of systems to enhance or restore signals that have been degraded in some way. For example, when
a pilot is communicating with an air trafHc control tower, the coimniinication can be de-
graded by die high level of background noisfe in the cY;ckpiL In this and many similar cases,
it is possible to design systems that will retain the desired sigiul, in this case the pilot's
A voice, and reject (at least approximately) the unwanted Signal, i.e., the noise. simile
set of objectives can also be found in the general area of image restoration and image enhancement. For example, images from deep space pmbes or earth-observing satellites typically represent degraded versions of the scenes being imaged because of limitations uf the imaging equipment, atmospheric effects, and errors in signal transmission in retuming the images to earth. Consequently, images returned from space are routinely pnH.cssed by systems to compensate for some of these degradarions. In addition, sjcii images are usu-
xxiii

jociv

Fore\ËOrd

ally processed lo enhance cermin features, sucb as lines (correfipondmg, foi example, to nver b^ds oi faults) or regional boundaries in which there are sharp contraNts in oolor or
darkness.
In addition to enh^cemeni ai^d restoration, in many apphcations there is a need to design systems to extract specific pieces of information from signals. The cstimstion of
heart rate from an elettrocardiograin is one examplcK Another arises in economic forecast-
ing. We may. for example, wish to analyze the history of an economic time seties, such as
a set of sttjck market averages, in order to estimate trends and other characteristics such
a& ^asonal \aiiHtions that may be (if use in making predicnons about Future behavior. In other applications, Th¨ focas may be on the design of signals with particular properties.
Specifically, in communicadotis applications considerable attention is paid to designing
signals to meet the constraints and requirements for successful transmission. Forexan:ple, long distance coramunic^ion through the atmosphere requires the use of signals with frequencies in a particular part of the electromagnetic spectrum. The design of communication signals must also take into account the reed for reliable reception in the presence of both distortion due to transmission through the atmosphere and interference from other signals being transmitted simultaneously by other users.
Another verj important class of applications in which the concepts and techniques
of signal and system analysis arise are those in which we wish to modify or control the
characteristics of a given system, perhaps through the choice of specific input signals or by combining the system with other systems. Illustrative of this kind of application is the design of control systems to regulate chemjcal processing plants. PlariL*i of this type are equipped with a variety of sensors that measure physical signals such as temperature, hu-
midity, and chemical cotnposLdon. The control system in ^uch a plant responds to thes^ sensor signali^ by adjusting quantities such as flow rates and temperature in order to regulate the ongoing chemical process. The design of aircraft autopilots and computer contrcl
systems represents another example. In this case, signals measuring aircraft speedy altitude^ and heading are used by the aircraft^s control system in order to adjust variables such
as throtLle setting and the position of the rudder and ailerons. These adjustments are made
to ensure that the aircraft follows a specified course, to smooth out the aircraft's ride, and to enhance its responsiveness to pilot commands. In both this case and in the previous example of chemical process control, an important concept, referred to as feedback, plays a major role, as measured signals are fed back and used to adjust the response characteristic i
of a system.
The examples in the preceding paragraphs represent only a few of an extraordinarily wide variety of applications for the concepts of signals and systems. The importance of these concepts stems not only from the diversity of phenomena and processes in which they arise, but also from the collection of ideas, analytical techniques, and methodologies that have been and are boing developed and used to solve problems involving signals and
systems. The history of this development esiends back over many centuries, and although most of this work was nwtivated by specific applications, many ofthese itieas have proven
to be of central importance to problems in a far larger variety of contexts than those for which they were originally intended. For example, the tools of Fourier analysis, which
form the basis for the frequency-domain analysis of signals and systems, and which we
will develop in sotne detail in this book, can be traced from problems of astronomy studied by the ancient Babylonians to the development of mathematical physics in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.

Foreword

xxv

In some of the e^amples that we have mejitionedj the signals vary continuously in
tinie, ^^he^KL^ in others, their evolution is described only at discrete points in time. For
example, in the analysis of electrical circuits and mechanical systems we are concerned with signals that vary continuously. On the other hand, the daily closing stock maiiet
average is hy its very nature a signal that evolves at discrete j>oinls in time (i.e., at the
close of each day). Rather than a curve as a function of a concinuous variable, then^ the
closing ^tock market average is a sequence of numbers associated with the discrete time itistants at which it is specified. This disttnctioti in the basic description of the evolution of
sigitals and of the systems that respond to or process these signals leads naturally to two parallel frameworks for signal and system analysis, one for phenomena and processes that are d&scribed in continuous time and one for those that are described iti discrete time.
The t{mcepts and techniques associated both with contitiuous-dme signals and systems and with discrctotime signals and systems have a rich history and are conceptually
closely related. Historically, however, because their applications have in the past been suf-
ficiently diflerent, they have for the most pan been siudied and developed somewhat sepa-
rately. Continuous-time signals and systems have very string rooU in p^oblcmi^ associated with physics and, in the more recent past, with electrical circuits and communications. Tho tEJchniques of discrete-time signals and systems have strong roots in numerical analysis. statistics, and time- series analysis associated with such applications as the analysis of economic and demographic data. Over the past several decades, however, the discipline*
of continuous- time and discrete-lime signals and systems have become increasingly entwined and the applications have become highly inierreUted, The major impetus for this
m has come from the dramatic advances technology for the implementation of systems
and for the generation of signals. Specifically, the continuing developmem of high-speed
digital computet^, integrated circuits, and sophisti^^ated high-density device fabrication
techniques has made it increasingly advantageous to consider processing continuous-time signals by representing them by time samples ti,e,, by converting them to discreie-time signals). As one example, the computer control systern for a modem high-performance
aircraft digitizes sensiir outputs such as vehicle speed in order to produce a sequence of sampled measurements which are then processed by the control system.
Because of the growing interrelationship between continuous-time ^gnals and sys-
tems and discrete-time signals and systems and because of the close relationship among the concepts and techniques associated with each, we have chcsen in this text to develop the concepb of continuous-time and discrete-time i^ignals and systems in parallel. Since many of the Cfincepts are similar (bot not identical), by tre^iting them in paratleL, insight and intuition can be shared and both the similarities and differences between them become better focused. In addition* as will be evident as we proceed through the material, there are some concepts that are inherently easier to understand in one fran>ework than the other
and, once understood, the iasight is easily transferable. Furthermore, this parallel treatment
m greatly facilitates our understanding of the very important practical context which cot^-
tmuoLis and discrete time are brought together, namely the sampling of continuous-time signals and the processing of continuous-time signals using discrete-time systems.
As we have so far described them, the notions of signals and systems are extremely
general concepts. At this level of generality, however, only the most sweeping statements can be made about the nature of signals and systems, and their properties can be discussed
only in the most elementary terms. On the other hand, an important and fundamental notion
in dealing with signals and systems is that by carefully choosing subclasses of each with

aocui

Foreword

p^kul^ properties that can then be exploited, we can analy^^e and characterize these
signals and systems in great depth. The principal focns in this bouk is on the particular class of linear time -invariant systems. The properties of linearity and time invanance that defjne this diss lead to aremarkahle set of concepts and techniques which are not only of
major practical importance but also analycicall^ tractable and intellectually satisfying.
As we have emphasized in this foreword^ signal and system analysis has a long his-
tory out of which have emerged some basic techniques and fundamenul principles which have extremely broad areas of application. Indeed, signal and system analysis is constantly
evolving and developing in refiponse to new problems, techniques, ^ind opponunities, We
fully expect fhis development to accelerate in pace as improved technology make^ posMble the implementation of increasingly complex systems and signal processmg techniques
Ln the future we will see signals and systems tools and concepts applied to an expanding scope of applications, hor these reasons, we feel that the topic of signal and system analy-
sis represents a body of knowledge that is of essential concern to the seienttst and engineer
We have chcsen the set of topics presented in this book, the argani^ation of the preseE-
tatJon, and the problems in each chapter in a way that we feel will most help the reader
to obtam a scrlid foundation in the fundamentals of signal and system analysis; to gain an understanding of some of the very important and basic applications of these fundamentals to problems in filtering, sampling, communications, and feedback system analysis; and to develop some appreciatlDn for an extremely powerful and broadly applicable approach to formulating and solving complex pmblems.

211

Contents

pREFAnF. XV[1
Af:KNfittT>:hcivin\Ts
FoKF.woRD xxvn

x\v

1 s IGNALS AND SYSTEMS 1
hO introduction 1
1.1 Ccmtinuous-Tinie and Discrete-TIine Signal!^ 1 I.J,1 Examples and Mathemahcal Rcpreseniation 1 1J.2 Signal Energy ariij Power 5
1.2 IVansforniations of tbe Independent Variable 7 1.2. Examples of Transformations of ihe Independent Variable 8
1.2.2 Periodic Signals 11
1.23 Even and Odd Signals 13
U Exponential and Sinusoidal Signals 14
1.3.1 Conti nut] US-Time Complex Exponential and Sinusoidal Signals 15 1.3.2 Discrete Time Complex Exponential and Sinusoidal Signals 2) ],;^.3 Periodicity PRipeities of Discrete-Time Cumplex Exponentials 25 1.4 Tbe Unit Impulse and Unit Step Functions 30 1.4.1 The Discrete-Time Unil Impulse and Unit Step Sequences 30 1.4.2 The Contin\ious-Time Unit Step and Unit Impulse Functions ^2 1.5 Continuous-Time and Di^rele-Time Systems 38 1 .5. 1 Simple Examples of Systems 39 1.5.2 Inierec>nnec;t;ons of Systems 41 l.ti Basic System PropertleN 44
1 .6. Systems with and without Memory 44
1.0. Invertibility and Inverse Systems 45 1.6.3 Causality 46 1,64 Siabilii> 4S 1.6.5 Time Invariatice 50
1.6.6 Linearity 53
1.7 Summary 56
Problems 67
2 Linear time-invakiant systems 74
2.0 Introduction 74
2.1 Discrete-Time LTI Systems: Tbe Convolution Sum 75

5

VJ.

2.1.1 2.1.2

The Representation of Discrete-Time Signals iii Terms of JmpulseK 15 The Discrete-Time Unit Impulse Response and the Convolution-Sum Representation of LTl Systems 77

2.2 Continuouis-Tlme LTl Systems: The ConvolutioD integral 90 2.2.1 The Ri;prcsentation of Continunus-Time Signcils in Terms of Impulses 90 2.2.2 The ContiiiLouN-Tiirte Unit Impulse Response and the Convolution
Integial Representation of LTl Systems 94

2J Properties of Linear Time-Invariant Systems 103
2.3.1 The Commutative Property J04 2.5.2 The Distributive PropeiTy 104 2 3.3 The Associative Property 107
2.5 4 ITl Systems with and without Memory 108

2.3.^ Invertibihty of LTl Systems 109 2.3,& Causality for LTT Systems 112 2 3.7 Stability for LTl Systems 113 2.3.8 The Unit Step Response of an LTl System 115

2.4 <!]Au!^al LTl Systems Described hy [MfTerential and Difference
Equations 1 1 2 4.1 Linear Constant-Coeffident Differential Equations 1 17 2.4.2 Lineiu Constant-Coefficient Difference Equations 121 2 4.3 Block Diagram Representations of Hrst^rdcr Systems De^ribed
by Differenlial and Difference Equations 124

Z.5 Singularity Functions 127 2 .5.1 The Unit Impulse as an Idealized Short Pulse 128 2.5.2 Defining the Unit Impulse through Convolution 131
n2 2 5.3 Unit Doublets and Other Singulariiy Functionn
2£6 Summarv+ 137
Problems 137

FOUKIER SERIES RKPRESENTATION 01^^
r'KKlODIC SIGNALS 177
3M Introduction 177 3.1 A HistoricaJ Perspective 178 3.2 The Response of LTl Systems to Complex fixponentials 1S2
3.3 Fourier Series Representatitm of Continuou!i^-Tiinc Penodii: Signals 1^6
3J 1 Linear Combinations of Harmonically Rdated Complex
Exponentials 1 8fi 3.3.2 Detennination of die Fourier Series Representation
of a Continuous-Time Periodic Signal 190
3 J C'onvergence of the Fourier Series 195

Contents

1

Contents

3,5 Properties of Coiitinuous-Tiuie Fourier Series 202 3.5.1 Lineaniy 202 3.5.2 Time Shifting 202 3.5.3 Time Rcvcfsal 203 3.5 4 Time Scaling 204 3.5 5 Multiplication 204 3.5.6 Qmjugatitm and Conjugate .Symmetnr' 2f>4 3.5.7 Farsevals Rslation foi Contmuous-Timc Periodic Signalji 205
3.5.8 SummuTy of Propertits of the Continuoiii-Titiie Fourier Series 205
3.5 9 Examples 205

5-(i Fourkr Series RtprestiTitution of Diiscrfte-Ttme
Periodic Signals 211
3.6.1 L inear Combinations of Harmonicslly Rdated Complex
Exponcntiitl.s 21

3,b.2 Determination of ihe Fcurier Series Representation of a PeritKljc Signal 212

X7 Properties of Discrete-Time Fourier Series 221
3.7.1 Multiplication 222 3.7.2 First Difference 222

3.7.3 ParsevaKs Relation lor Diserctc-Time Penodic Signals 223 3.7.4 Examples 223

3.8 F<iurier Series and LTI Systems 226

3.9 Filtering 231

3.9.1 Frequency-Shaping filters 232 3.9.3 Frequency- Selective Filters 23fi

3.10 3.11

Examples nf CoDtinuous-Time TiLlers Described by

DifTerentiaJ Equations 239

A 3.10. L

Simple /?CLuwpass Filter 239

3.10.2 A Simple KC Highpass Filter 241

Examples of Discrete- Tim¨ Filters Described by ~

Dl^erencc Kquations 244

3.11.1 First-OrdeT Recursive Discrete-Time Fillers 244 3- 11. 2 Nonrecursivc Disureie-Time Filters 245
3.12 SummaTy 249

Problems 250

The continuous -TIM k fourifr transform 284
4.0 Introduction 2&4
4.1 Represtntation of Aperiodic Signals: The Contlnuous-Tlnic Fouriei TVan^rorm 285
4.1 l Development of the Founer TranJiforni Representation tif an .Aperiodic SignaJ 285
4.1 .2 Convergence of fourier Transforms 2S9 4.1 .3 Examples of ConLinuous-Tinie Fourier Transforms 290

vi.-t

viii

4.2 The Fourier TVansform for Periwlic Signals 296

4.3 Properties of the Continuous-Time Fourier 'fyansform 300

4.?.1 4.3.2 4.3.3 4.3.4 4.3.5 4.3.6 4.3.7

Linearky 301
Time Shifting 301 Conjufiation and Conjugate Symmetry
Piffenentiaiion and Integratjou 306
Time and Frcqjen[:y Scaiing 30R Dualit> 309
Parsevars Relation 313

303

4.4 I'hc Convolution Property 314 4.4 I Exaitiples 317

4.5 The MuLtiplicati<in Property 322
4.5 1 Frequejicy-Selective Fillering with Variable Center Frequency 325

4.6 T^bl¨^ of Fourier Properties and of Bask Fourier Transfarm PÈdr$ 32ft

4.7 Systems Characterized by Linear Con^tuDt-CovfficJent DifTerentiAl Equations 330

4.8 Summary 333

Problems 334

5 The DiscRETE-rrivrE fourier transform 358

5.0 Intrwlui:tion 35$

5A Representation of Aperiodic Signals: The Discrete-Time
Fourier Transform 359

5.1.1 5 . ] .2 5,1.3

L>eve lopment ot tlie Discrete-Time Fourier Transifctrm 3 59 Examples of Discrete-Time Fourier Transforms 362 Convergence Issues Asst>cia.ted with the Dist^rete-Time Fourier TiansfoTm 366

5.2 The Fourier TVausfi>rm for Periodic SigimLs 367

53 Properties of the Discrete-Time Fourier TVansform 372

5.3,1 5 3.2
53.3
.'5,3.4

Periodicity of the Discrete-Time Fourier Transform Linearity of the Foiirier Transform 373
Time Shifting and frequency Shifting 373 Conjugation and Conjugate Symmetry 375

373

5.3.5 Differencing and Accumulation 375 5.3.6 Time Reversal 376

5.3.7 Time Expansion 37?

5.3r^ Differentiation in Frequency 380

5.3.9 Parseval s Relation 380
5A The ConvoiutiDn Property 382

5,4. 1 Ejtamplfts 3&3

5.5 The Multiplication Property 388

5.6 Tables of Fouiier TVansform Properties and Basic Fourier TVansform Pairs 390

Content

Conients

J^

5.7 jynahiy 39<J 5.7.] Dualitj in the Discrete-Time Fonrier Series 391 5 7.2 Duality between the lDisi:rete-Time Fourier Tr^n.sforin iiiid the Continnous-Timc Fourier Series 395
S,S Systems Characterized by J.inear Con^tant-Coerficieiit FKITerenct! Eqiiatiuns 396
S.9 Su miliary 399 Problenis 400

Tjmk ajnd fkkqukncy characterization of sjgnals am) systems 423

6.0 Introductinn 423
6.1 The Magnitude-Phase Reprcsentalion of Ihe Fourier Transform 423
(i2 The Magniiude-^Phase Representation of the Frequency Response of LTI Systems 427 6.2. 1 I.inear and Nonliaear Phase 428
6 2.2 Cmmp Delay 4?0
6.2.3 Log-Magnilude and Bode Ph>UT 4-lh 6.3 Time-Domain Pro[>erties of Ideal Freiiuency^Selective
Filters 439
64 Time-Bomain and Frequency-Domain Aspects of Nonideal
Filters 444 6.S First-Order and Second-Order Continuous-Time Systems 448
6.5.1 First-Order Continuous-Time Systems 44S 6.5.2 Second-Order Continuous-Time Systems 451 6.5.3 Bode Plots for Rational Frequency Responses 456
6.fi First>Order and Second-Order Discrete-Time Systems 461
6.6.1 Pirst-Order Discrete-Time Systems 461 6.6.2 Second-Order Discrete-Time Systems 465
6.7 Examples of Time- and Frequency-Domain Analysis of Systems 472 6.7.1 Analysis of an Automobile Sijspension System 473 6.7.2 Examples of Discrete-Tiirie Nonrccursive Filters 476
6,£ Summary 482
Problems 433

X Sampling 514

7.0 Introduction 514

7.1 HepresentatJon of a Continuous-Time Signal by Its Samples:

The SamplinK Theorem 515

M 7.

Impulse-Tram Sampling 516

7.1.2 Sampling with a Zero-Order Hold 520

1

1

7.2 Reconstruction of a Signal from Its Samples Ui^ing Interpolation 522
'73 The EfT-ect of Undersampling: Aliasing SZ7
7A DiscretÈ-Time Processmg of Continuous-Time Signals 534
7.4. EHgita] Differentiator 54 7.4.2 Half-Sample Dela> 543 7.5 Sampling of Di$cr¨t¨-Tiine Signals 545 7.5.1 Impulse'Train Sampling 545 7.5.2 Discretc-Timt E>ecLniation and Interpolation 549
7.6 Summary 555
Problem!! 556
O Communication systems 582

8.0 Introduction 582

8.1 Complex Exponential and Sinusoidal Amplitude Modulation 583

S.1.1 Amplitude Modulatioi) \^'ith a Coniplex Exponential Carrier 583

8,1 2 Amplitude Modulation with a Sinusoidii] Carrier 585

AM 8.2 Demodulation for Sinusoidal

587

8.2.1 Synchronous Demodulation 587

8.2.2 Asynchronous Demodulation 59Q

S3 Frequency-rHTision Multiplexing 594

8.4 Single-Sideband Sinusoidal Amplitude Modulation 597

8.5 Anrnplitude Modulation with a Pulse-T^aln Carrier 601 8.5-1 Modulation of a Pulse-Train Carrier 601 8.5.2 Time- Division Multiplexing 604

8*6 Pulse-Amplitude Modulation 604

8.6.1 Pulse-Amplitude Modulated Signals 604

PAM 8.6.2 ItiLersymbol Interference in

Systems 607

8 6 3 Digital Pulse- Amplitude and Pulse-Code Modulation 610

8.7 Sinusoid*! Frequency Modulation 611 8,7.1 Narrowband Frequency Modulation 613 8 7 2 Wideband Frequency Modulation 615 8.7.3 Periodic Square-Wave Modulating Signal 617

8.8 Discrete-Time Modulation 619

8.8.1 Discretfi-Time Sinusoidal Amplitude Mtxlulation 619 8.8.2 Discrete-Time Transmodulation 623
8.9 Summary 623

Problenu 625

The L4PLACE TRANSFORM 654

9*0 Intiwluction 654
9.1 The Laplace Transform 655 9.2 The Region of Convergence for Laplace Tk'aiisfomis 662

Contents

1

1

Cont*ms

xi

93 The Inverse Laplace IVansrorm 670

9.4 Geometric Evalu^tJon of the Fourier TVansform from the Pole-Zero Plot 674

^),4,l Fiist-Ofder Systems 676
9A2 Second-Order Systems 677

9A.} All-Pass Systems 6&1

9S Properties of the Laplace TVansfomi 1^82

y,5,L Linearity of ihe Laplace TransftirTTi 683

9.5.2 Time Shifting 6S4

J 9..^

Shifting in the jr-rjomain 685

9.5.4 Time Scaling 685

9.5.5 9.5.6 9.5.7 9.5.8 9.5.9 9.5.10

Oinjygation 687 Convolution Pmperty 687
Differentiation in the Time Dom^ti 68S Differentiation in the ^-Domain 668 Integration in the Time Domain 690 The Initial- an<l Finals Value Theorems 690

9.5.1 Table of Properties 691

M.6 Sonte Laplace Transform Pairs 692
J 9 Analysis and Characterization of LTI Systems Using the
Laplace Tk'ansform 693

9.7.1 Cau5.aMty 693

9.7 2 Stability 695 9.7.3 LTl Systems Characterized by Linear Constant-Coefficient
Differential Equations 698 9.7.4 Examples Relating System Behavior to the System Function 701 9.7.5 Butterworth Filters 703

9.8 System Function Algebra and Block Diagram Representations 76
9,8, ] System Fanctitjns for Interconnections of LTI Systems 707 9.B.2 Block Diagram Representations for Causal LTI Systems Described
by Differential Equations and Rational System Functions 708 9.9 The Unilateral Laplace IVansform 714
9,9,] Examples of Unilateral Laplace Transforms 714 9.9:1 Properties of the Unilateral Laplace Transform 716 9.9.3 Solving Differential Equations Using the Unilateral Laplace
Tran.sform 719

9.10 Sutnmary 720

Problems 721

10 The z-tkansform 741
1 0.0 Introduction 74 10.1 The ^-T^ansf&rm 741 10*2 The Region of Convergence for Hie ^-T>ansform 748

X3-1

10J The Inverse ;-TVansform 757

XOA Geotnetric Evaluation of the Fourier iVansform from the

Pole-Zero Plot 763 10-4 1 Fir^t-Order Systems 763 10.4.2 Seconti -Older Systems 165

10,5 10*6

Properties of the ^-l^aiisform 767 10.5.1 LiQcarity 761 in. 5. 2 Time Shifting 767 10 5,3 Scaling ii: the ;;-Domain 768 in. 5.4 Time Reversal 769 ltJ.5,5 Time Expansiwi 769 It). 5.6 Coiyugalion 770 IC.5.7 The Convoimion Property 770 10.5.R Differentiation in the z-Domaitt 772 U15.9 The Initial-Value Theorem 773
10.5.10 Summary of Properties 774
Some Common j-TVanisfonn Pairs 774

10^7 Apal^£ls and Characterization of LTl Systems Using
z-IVansforms 774 K17.1 Causality 776 ;0.7.2 Stability 777 10-7.3 LTl Systems Characterized by Linear Const an t-Coefitlcient
Difference Equations 779 10.7.4 Examples Relating System Behavior to the System Function 7S

lO.S

System Function Algebra j^nd Block Diagram Representations 783 10.8. 1 System Functions for Interconnections of IJIl Systems 784 10 8.2 Block Diagram Representations f£r Cau.sal LTl Systeins Described
by Difference Equations and Rational System Functions 784

10.*

The UuiUteTAl z-Tntnsform 7£9 10 9.1 Examples of Uniiateral ^-Transforms and Inverse Transforms
10 9.2 Properties of the Unilateral 7-Trarsform 792 1 9.3 Solving Difference Equations Using the Unilateral
^-Transform 795

790

10.10 Summary 796

Problems 7?7

I I Linear fekdback systems 816

ILO
11 A
11.2

iDtroductioii 816

Linear Feedback Systems 81^

Some Applications and Consequences of Feedback

L2 1

,1

InversG System Desi gn 820

3L2.2 Compsn.sation for Nonideal Elements S21

11.2.3 Srabihzatioii of Un.stable Sy^^tems 823

S20

Contents

J

1 ] ,3
11.4
11.5 11.6

\l.2A Sampled-Data Feedback Systems H26

a. 1.5 Tracking Systems R2S 6 1 1 .2 DestabilJzati<?n Ciiuscd by Feedback K3U

Roat-Locus Analysis of Linear Feedback Systems 832

113-1 An Inlroductojy Èxa.mple S33

1 1 .3.2 li .3.3

Equation for ihtr Closed-Loop Polej* 834

The End Points of the Root Locus: The Closeci-Ltjjp Poles for

+^ K = iiid \K\ --

S36

1 1 ,3.4 The Angle Criterion 836

1 1 3-^ Propenies of the FtotU Locus 841

The Nyquist StabHity Criterion 846
n .4. 1 The Encirtlctnetic Ptx>perty 847
1 1 .4.2 The ?Nyquist Criterion for Commuous-Time LTI
Feedback Systems 8fili 1 1 .4.3 The Nyquis; Criienon foi Discrete -Time LTI
Feedback Systems fi36

Gain and Phase Margins 85^

Summary 866

Frobktns 867

ApPENLIX PARTlAL-FKACriON EXPANSION 909 BimjoGRAPHi 92 Answers 931
iNiJtx 94!

--
1 Signals and systems

1.0 INTRODUCTION
As described in the Fc}rewoTd, the intuitive notitms ot signals and systems dnae in a rich Va-
riety of contexts. Moreover, as we will see in this book^ there is an analytical framework
that IS, a language for describing signals and system.^ andanextren^ely powerful set of tools
-- for aualyzing them that applies equally well to problems in inany fields. In this chapter^
we begin our development &f the analytical fr<imework for signals and syirems by introducing their mathematical description arid representations. In the chapters that follow, we
build on this foundation in order to develop and describe additional concepts and methods that add considerably both to our underetanding of signals and systems and to our ability to analyze and solve problems involving signals and systems that arise in a broad array of
applications.

1.1 COISfTINUOUS-TlME AND DISCRETE-TIME SIGNALS

r 1 .

1

Examples and Mathematical Representation

Signals may describe a wide variety of physical phenomena. Although signals ean be represented in many ways, in all cases the information in a signal is contained in a paoem of

variations of some form. Forexample, consider the simple circuit in Figure l,K In this case,

the

patterns of variation

over time

in

Uie source

and capacitor voltages,

v^

and

v^ >

are

exam-

ples of signals. Similarly, as depicted in Figure 1,2, the variations over time of the apphed

force/ and the resulting automobile velocity v are signals. As another example, consider

the human vocal mechanism, which produces speech by creating fluctuations in acous-

tic pressure. Figure 1,3 is an illustration of a recording of such a speech stgnal, obtained by

T

AW^

Signals and Systems

Chap 1

Figure l.t A simple fiC circjFt with source
voltage v^ and capacitor voltape v^.

P^
Figure 1 .2 An automabiie responding to an applied force t from ttie engine and to a retardinp fritiliiJnal force av propof^ional tc ^ha
automobile's velocit/ v.

U4

^

---

200 msec

1

1

£

1

1

1

1

1

^

1

1

1

1

j

sh

I

I

f^HHm4l*lWii^^

--

:

w

rikv
ch

^-VHWiN+W^
Sfl

Fig*ine 1.3 Example of a recording of speech. [Adapted from ^ppficaifons of Digil3l Signal Processing, AM. Oppenheim, ed, (Englewood Cliffy, NJ.: Prentice-Hall, Ijic, 1973), p. 121] The signal represents acoustic pressure vanations as a function ot trme for the spoken words "should
we chasfl.* The top line of the figure corresponds to the word ^'should,"
the second fine to ttie word ''we,'' a;id ttie Jast two lir^es to the word "chase/* (Wfl hav¨ indicated the approxjmaite t^eginnings and endings of each successive sound in each
word.}

using amicTophone to sense variatiopJi in acouscic prcisure, which arc then converted into an ekctrica] signal. As can be seen in the figure^ different sounds correspond to differem
patterns in the variations jf acoUKtic pressure, and the huraan voca] system produces intelligible speech by generating particular sei^uences of these patterns. Alternatively, for die
m monochromatic picture, shown in Figure 1.4, it is die pattern of variations brightness
across the image that is important.

Sec. 1.1

ContirLious-Time and Discrete-Time Signals

Figure 1.4 A mon&chromatic
fiicture.
Signals ar^' represented matheTnatically as functions of one or irtcte independent variables. For example, a speech signal can be represented mathematically by acoii&tic pressure as a fnnciion of time, and a picture can be repreijented by brightness* as a func-
tion of two spatial variables. In this book, we focus our attention on signals involving a
single independent variable. For convenience* v/e will generally refer to the independent
variable as time, although it may not in fact represent time in specific applications. For
example, in geophysics, signals representing variations with depth of physical tjuantities sucli as density, porosity, an<i electrical resisdvity are used to study the structure of the earth. Also, knowledge of the variations of air pressure, temperature, and wind speed with altitude are e;(tremel> important in meteorological investigations. Figure L5 depicts atyp-
ical esarnple of annual average vertical wind profile as a flmction of height. The measured variations of wind speed with height are used in examining weather pattemsn as well as wind conditions that may affect an aircraft during final approach and landing.
Throughout this hook we will be considering two basic types of signals: continuons-
time signals and discrete-time signals. In the case of continuous-time *agnals the independent variable is continuous, and thus these signal s are defined for a continuum of values

--
d<i
24 -
22 20

^

^^^^^^

13

^16

j^

o

jT

r^ / = 14
--"

^f^

-

Q.10
CO

-- ff

e -f

6-

4-

2

J
1
200 400 600 800 1,000 1,200 1,400 1.600

Height (feet)

Figure 1 .5 Typical annual vertical wind profile, (Adapts from Crawford 9fid IHudson, National Severe Storms Utwratorv Report, ESSA ERLTM-NSSL 4B. August 1970.)

400 350
ñt
ft TttT¨*vrf
250 200 150 10O
50

Signals and Systems

Ct\^p. 1

tvvt' ^

T ft
*

Jan. 5,1929

Jan. 4,T930

K6 Ffgure

An example ot a discrete-time s^g^,a! Tht weekJy DovJJor^es

stock market index from January 5, 1929. to January 4, 1930.

of the independent variable. On the other hand, diactete-time signals are detuned inly vX

discrete times, and consequently, for these signals, the independeiit variiible takes on only
A a discrete sci of values. speech signal as a functioii of time and atmospheric pressure

as a futiction of altitude are examples of continiMjus-time signals. The weekly Dow-Jones

stock market index, as illustrated in Figure 1,6, is an example of a di^Lrete-time signal.

Other examples of discrete-time signals can be found in demographic studies in which

various attritutes, such as average budget, cnttic rate, or pounds of fish caught, are tab-

ulated iigainst such discrete variables as family size, total population, or type of fisshing

vessel, respectively.

To diistinguish beiwecn continuous- time and discrete-time signals, wc will use the

symbol t to denote the continucus-tiine independent variable and ;i to denote the discrete-

time independent variable. In addition, fcsr continuous- time signals we will enclose the

independent variable in parentheses ( ), whereas for discrete-time signals wc will use

We brackstsi [ 1 tt* enclo5:.e the independent variable.

will also have frequent occasions

when it will be useful to represent signals graphically. Illustrations of a continuous- time

signal x[0 and a discrete-time signal _t[¨] are sh<^wn in Figure 1 .7 It is important to note

that the Aiiicrfcte-tixne signal x[n] is deftned only for integer values of the independent

variable. Our choice of graphiLal representation for x[n] emphasizes this fact, and for

further emphasis we will on occasion refer to x[rt] as a discrete-time sequence,
A discrete-time signal x[n\ may represent a phenomenon for which the independent On vanable is inherently di^iccete. Signals such aft demographic data are estamples of this.

the Dther hand, a very important class of discrete- time signals arises from the sampling of

continuous-time signals. In this case, the discrete-lime signal x[n\ represents successive

samples of an undetlying phenomenon for which the independent variable is continuous.
Because of their spoed, computational power, and flexibility, modem digital processors are used to Implement many practical systems, ranging from digital autopilots to digital audio

systems. Such systems require the use of discrete-time sequences representing sampled
-- versions of continuous-time si^ials e.g.£ aircraft poi^jtion, velocity^ and heading for an

,

Sec. ' .1

Continijous-'ime arni Discrete-Time Signals

X|-1]

-9 S
ri

Ll^LzIilI l"^ il 1"^

^

^~
^

345

6

77

10
9[

n

i

it)

Figure 1.7 Graphical r^presenMions of (a) continuous-time and (b) dtscrete-
tim^ $ignais.

-- autopilot or speech and music for an audio system. Also, pictures in newspapers or in ihis
-- book, for that matter at:tuai]y eonsit^t of a very fine grid of points, and eacii of these points
represent a sample of the brightness of the corresponding point iti the original image. No
matter what the source of the data, however, the signal x[n] is defined only for integer vaJues of n. It makes no more sense to refer to the 3^th sample of ^ digital speecii signal than it does to refer to the average budget for a family with 2\ family members.
Throughout most of this book we will treat discrete-time signals and continuous-time signals separately but in parallel, so that we can draw on insights developed in one setting
to aid otir understand! ng of another. In Chapter 7 we will retiun to the question of sampl ing and in that c^intext we will bring continuous -time and discrete-time concepts together in order to examine the relationship between a continuous'time signal und a discrete-time signal obtained from It by sampling,

7 - K2 Signal Energy and Power

From the range of examples provided so far, we see that signaJs may represent a troad

variety of phenomena. In many, but not all, applications, the signals we consider are di-

rectly related to physical quantities capturing power and energy in a physical system For

HO example, if v(/) and

are, respectively, the voltage and current across a resistor with

resistance R, then the instantaneous power is

= Pit-) = v(Oi(t)

-^1^(0.

ft

(1.1)

SignaJs and Systems

C^ap, 1

^ The lotal enetj^ expended over the time interval ^i ^ f f2 i^

r '' p(t)dt ^

lv\f)dr.

2)

and the average pftwer over this time inttrv^ is

1

= r'^

.

.

p(t)dt

1

r-

1

->

v^{t)4t.

- h

f Jf,

^ i2'i j/L

(1.3)

Similarly, for the automobile depicted in Figure 1 .2^ the instantaneous povver dissipated
through fricdon is pit) = f?v^it\ and we can then deflne the total energy and average

power over a lime interYai in the J^ame way as in eqs. ( 1.2) and (1 .3).

With simple physical examples such as these a;: motivation, it is a cotilmon aid

worthwhile convention to use similar terminology for power and energy for any contiDuous-

t^mc signal A{t) or Èiny discrete-time signal x[n]. Moreover, as we will see shortly, we wi[l

frequently find it convenient to consider signals that take on cotnpLejt values tn this case,

^ ^ the total energy over the time interval t]

r

t2 in a. continuous-time signal xir) is

dietined as

'\x{0\^dt,

(1.4)

where |j:[ denotes the magnitude of the (possibly complex) nutnber x. The time- averaged

-- power is obtained by dividing eq, <L4) by die length, fj Si, of the time inijerva]. Simi-

^ ^ larly, the totai energy in a disctete-time signal ^|n] over the time interval n|

J7

n^ is

defined as

2 \^i"f'

n.5i

and dividing by the number of points in the interval, ¨;-¨! + 1, yields the average power

over the interval. It i^ important to remember that the terms "power"* and *'encrgy'^ are used

here independently of whether the quanutics in eqs. (1 .4) and ( 1 .5) actually are related to
physical energy.' Nevertheless, we will find it convenient to use these terms in a general

fa^on,

FuTthennore, in nmay systenns we will be interested in cramming power and energy

-£ < < -£ < < in signals over an infinite time inten^al, i.e., for

f

-i-¨ or for

n

-t-tc, in

these cases, we define the total energy as iimiis of eqs. (1.4)and (L5) as thetime iriterva]

increases without bfluud. That is, in continuous time,

and in discrete time.

È. - lim

\Mi}i^dt=

\x(t)\^dt,

r^^j_r

J .,

(1.6)

T T È. ^ lim

W¨l|^ =

\x[nf.

n=-N

n=--^

(IJ)

' Even jf such a rclaUi/nstap does eiist, eqs. ( 1 .i> and (1,5^ may ba ve the wrung dimmsinDs and scaUDgs.

£% Fur example, L^umparing eqs. (1.2) $iLd(],4), wc

that Lt jc^^f) repneseDt^ the voltage acm-^s a resi-itor, then

cq. i 1 4) must be divided by ttie resistance (measured, ft>r example, in ohins) tu obtdJD unils ufpity^ica] energy.

--

Sec. 1 2

TranEfarmations o1 ttie Independent VariabJe

7

Note that for sonie signals the integral in eq. (1 .6) or sum in eq, < 1,7) might not converge

e.g., if a(0 or j[nj equals a nonzero constant value for ail time. Such signals have infinite

<^ energy, while signals with E^

have finite eneigy.

In an analogous fashion, we can define the titne-averaged power over an infinite

interval as

P- = ;To.2^| J^(0|'rfr

(1.8)

and

n - --N
in continuous time and discrete tiine, respectively. With these definitions, we can identify
three important classes of signals. The first of these is the class of signals with finite total
< energy, i.e., those signal.s for which È¨ ¨. Such a signal must have zero average ptiwer,
since in the continuous time case, for example, we see from etj. (J ,8) that

^ An example of a finite-energy signal is a signal that takes on the value 1 for :^ r

1

= = and otherwise. In this case, E^.

1 an<i /*^

A second class of signals are those with fioite average power P:^. From whal we

> = have just seen, if P^ 0, then, of necessity, È^ ^. This, of course, mates sense, since

if there is a nonzero average energy per unit lime (i.e., nonzero power), then integrating

or summing this over an infinite time interval yields an infinite amounl of energy. For

= example, the constant signal x[fi] 4 has infinite energy, but average power P^: = 16,

A There are also signals for which neither /*,, nor E^ are finite. simple example is the

^ We signal x{t}

f.

will encourner other examples of signals in each of these classes in

the remainder of this and the following chapters.

1 .2 TRANSFORMATIONS OF THE INDEPENDENT VARIABLE
A central concept in signal and system analysis is that of the transformation of a signal.
For example, in an aircraft control system, signals corresponding to the actions of the pilot are transformed by elecuical and mechanical systems into changes in aircraft thrust or the positions of aircraft control surfaces iuch as the rudder or ailerons, which in lorn are transformed thTT>ugh the dynamics and kinematics of the vehicle into changes in aircraft velocity and heading. Also, in a tiigh-fidelity audio system, an input signal representing music as recorded on a cassette or compact disc is modiJied in order to enhance desirable characteristics, Lo remove recording noise, or to balance the several components of the
signal (e,g,, treble and bass). In this section, we focus on a very limited butimpi>rtant class
of elementary signal transformations that involve simple modificaticm of the independent
variable, i.e., the time a\is. As we will see in this and subsequent sections of this chapter,
these elementary transformations allow us to introduce several basic properties of signals
m and systems. In later chapters, we will find thet they also play an hnpottantmle defining
and character! King far richer and important classes of systems.

signals and Systems

Chap. 1

1.2.1 Examples of Transformations of the Fndependcnt Vanabfe

A simple and very JtnporTant example of iransff;miing the ijidependent variable of a signal

A m i* a UmÈ shift. time shift in discrete time is illustrated in Figure 1 8, which we have

tiA'o signals x[n] and jf^r -- uo] that are identical in shape, but that are displaced or shifted

We relative to ench tjlticr

will also encounter time shifts in continuous time, as illustrated

-- in Figure 1.9, in which x(t trs) represents a dda>'ed (if /o i^ positive! or advanced (if .'i,

h negative) sersion of xU). Signals that are related in this fashion aiisc in appliLatiunh

such as radar> sonar, and seismic signal processing, in which several receiv^ers at different

locations observe a signal being transnutted through a metliiitn (water, rock, air, etc.} In

this case, the difference in propagation nine fit>m the point of origin of the tratisniirtcd

s:gnal lo any two receivers results in a tirr.e shift between the signaJs at the two retcivers.

A second baNic: Transformation of the time axis is that of ttm^ u^vfirsaL For example,

a^ illustrated in Figure 1.10, the signal Af-n] is obtained from the signal xyt\\ hy a reflec-
tion about n ^ (i.e., by reversing the signal). Sitnilarly, as depicted in Figure 1.11, the signal j;{-- /> is obtained from the signal x\t) by a reflection about/ ^ 0, Thus, if x'j) rep-

resents an audio Kapc recording, then x{--t) In the same tape recording played backward.

Another transformtition is that oi time sccjling. In Figure 1.12 we have illustrated three

signals. xO), x{2t}, and .v(//2), that are related by linear scale changes in the independent
variable. If we again think of the cianiple of jniO as a taps recording, then x(2i^ is that

recording played at twice the speed, and x{t/2) is the recording played at half-speed.

Ttis often of interest to determine the eflecL of transforming the independent variabb

^ of a given signal x(t) to obtain a signal of the tortn x\0!t -h /if), where a and are given

numbers. Such a transformation of the independent variable preserves the shape of xii],
except that the resulting signal maybe Unearly stretched if |aff < 1, linearly compressed
> < if|a| 1, reversed in time if Q 0, and shifted in time if ^ is nonzero. This is illustrated

in the following set of examples,

x[nl

I
L_diiir
"W^
xlr- nj

w^ li.

Figure 1.8 Dlscrete-linie s^goals

related by a ttme shrft. In this figure

> - /lb

I}, 30 that x[n y^J is a delayed

\/erson of x[ft] (i.e., each point in x[f}]

occurs later in x[n - nrj]l

Sec 1.2

Trans'ofmations of itre Incependeni Variable

x[nj

uJ IP (a)
>-[iM

Figure T.9 Oofitinuous-time signals related

< by a time shift. In this figure ^

0, so that

x{t

b) IS an advanced version of x{f) (I.e.,

each point in x{{) occurs at an eaclier time in
^U - h))

U tT
TU
Figure 1.10 (a) A discrete-time $fgnal x[n]\ [b] its rejection x[ - n] about D = Q.

x(-t)

x(2t)
r^
x{t/2}

FJguie 1.11 A ja) cantinuous-time signal x{t); (b) its reflection Jf(-f) about 1 = 0.

Figure 1.12 Continuous-time signals related by time scaling.

1

10

Signals and Systems

criap. 1

Example 1 .
Given the si^^nal x(/) shown in Figure 1.13(a), the signal x(t + !) oorrt^poi^ds to an
advance i shift to the left) b\ one unit a^cng ihe / axis a<i illu^trat^ in Figurt l.l^{b).
= SpeciKt;a]ly, we note that lhcvalutofjf(f hat / - /o cecuri ir Tfj" + l)aU fn - J. For

xfl)

-- I
<aj

1 x{t+1}

-1
^b)
1 M-t^1J

-1
(0
x(|t)

2/3 4/3 X^^tHl)
T

-2/3

2''3 (e)

Figure 1,13 (a) The canhrnjoiis-tiir^ signal xit) used in Exampies 1.1-1 3
ta illustrate transformations of the tnde;iender.t variatjle, (bj the liine-shi^ed
+ siflnaf y(f -H 1); (c)the signal xi-t 1) obtained by a time sJiifland a lime + r^ersal; (tJ) ene time-scaled sigjiai xt|r); and [s] tne signaf ^(|f 1) obtained
by titiie shifting and scaling.

.

Sec 1.2

TransformaLionsQf the Independent Variable

11

= -- -- example, the value of jf(f) at f

+ = 1 ia found in .T{r

1 ) a( /

I

I

0. Also, sintt

< H we x{t) is zero ror ^ 0,

have i"(^ + zero for r < -- L SLmilarly, since t{/) is iero for

> > t

+ 2. jf(r 1) IS zero tor /

I.

Let us also consider the signal x(--r + ]), wTiich may be obiaiJied by replacing r

+ with -- / JTi r(f + Ijr That is, Jff -^ 1) is the time reversed version of x{i -+ 1 ). Thus,

x{ --t + I) may be obtained graphically by reflecting _r(/ -i- 1 > about the r axk as shown

in Figure l.n(c).

Example 1.2

Given the signal j(0, -ihowti in Figuie 1 -13(a), the^igniJ xi^fi corfc^pondi to :i linear

compression of x{t) by a factor [)f f OS illustraitd in Figure l.l3Cd). Spct;ifitally we note

- = that the value of j(r) at ?

ij^ occurs in 7i\i) ^1 r

^^cj. For cAample, the valje of

= - < we x{t) at r

I ii found in i(^r) ac r = (L) ^

|, Also, i^ince Jt(f) is zero for /

0.

< > have j(^o zero for/ (1 Similarly, since Jt(0 is zero forf > 2. j;{|;)is zero for r =|.

ExampJe T.3

Suppose that wc W3uld like to determine the effect of transforming the independent van-

able uf a given signal, ;v(j"K lo obtain a signal of the fomutfof/ + ^), where v and ,3 are
A given Tiumbci^. systematic approach to doing this is to first dct-uy nr advance x[t) in

actvrdiincc with the value of ^, and then to perform time scaling and/f^r time reversal on

the resulting signal in accordance with the value of rv, Tlit: dtfliiyed or advanced Mgnal is

< > < lineaTLy stretched if |of I

IJinearly conrtpressedif |ct[

Land reversed in time if a

0.

7b illustrate this approach, let us sho* how x{\t ^ \) may be determined for the

signal jf(r) shown in Figure 1.13(a), Since ^ = 1. we first advance (shift to the left) x{t)

by 1 as shown in Figure 1,1 3Cb)- Sifitre |rtl = ^, sve may linearly compress the shifted

signal of Figure 1 T3(b) by a factor of \ to obtain the signal shown in Figure 1 1 ^(c>.

In additii>n to their use in representing physical phenomena ^uch as the time shift
m a soTiar signal and the speeding up or reversal of an audiotape, transforitiaLii^ns of ihe
independent variable are extremely useful \w sigral and sy&tcm analysis. In Section 1 6
and in Chapter 2, we will use transformations of the in<Jependent variable to introduce and
analyze the properties of systems. These transformations are alst) imptJitani in defining and exairining some important properties of signals.

7 .2.2 Periodic Signals

An important clasis of signals that we will encinunter frequently throughout this book is
A the class ^Ipenodic signals. periodic continnous-time signal jU) has the property that
there is a positive value of T for which

= + x{r)

j:(/ T)

tl.ll)

for all values of r. In other words, a periodic signal has the property that it is unchanged by a
time shift of T. In this case, we say that i(0 \spenodic with period T Periodic continuous-
time signals arise in a variety of contexts. For example, as illustrated Jt^ Problem 2.61,
the natural response of systems in which energy is conserved, such as ideal LC circuits
without resistive energy dissipation and ideal mechanical systems without frictional losses,
are periodic and, in fact, are composed of some at the basic periodic signals that wc will
introduce in Section 1.3.

1Z

Signals and Systems

Chap. 1

x{t)

A A A A A-

-2T

-T

n

Figure 1.T4 Acontinuoirs-time
periodic signai

An example of a pcri^xlic continuoui-:imc SLgti^l is given in Figure 1 14, From the

figure or fronneq. (1,1 1), wecan reajily deiiuce that if x(/)ispericidic with period T, then

-- xit) -- x(t + mT) for all r and foi any integer m. Thus, j:(0 is a]sf> penodic with period

2T, 3T, 4r,

The fundamental penod To of sit) is the smallest positive vaiut T of for

which eq. (IJI) holds. This definition of the fuTidamcntai period works, except if xU) is

a constant. In this tase the fundamental period is undefined, since Ji(t) is periodic for afiy
T A choice t>f (so there is no smallest positive vaiue). signal x(t} that is not periodtc wilJ

be referred to as an aperif?dic signaL

Periodic signals art defined analogously in discrete time. Specifically, a. discrete-
N time signal xin] is periodic with period W, -A'here is a positive integer^ if it is unchanged

by a time shift of iV, i.e., if

An] ^ x[n + A/']

fl-12)

for all values L>f fi. If ^. (1 . 12) holds^ then x[n] is also periodic with penod 2.V, 3A', ....
TVi^furKktmemal period N\:i is the smallest positive value of /V for which oq, (1.12) holds.
An example of a di.screte-ume periodic signal with fundamental period jVq = 3 is shown
in Figure LI 5.

x(n]

rm Ill

-- Figure J * 1 5 A discrete-tjme pe-

n riodic srcjnal wrth fundamental period

= .^t

3.

Exampfe f.4

Let us illusiraleTlic type of problem sylvin^ that may be required in determining whether or not a giviin iigtial is periodic. The signal whose perionljcity we wish ta check ii given
by

J(0 =

Cf)S(.rJ
^inOO

ifr < U
^ if r

(J 13)

Fn>ni trigonometry, we know that cos(^ + 2t) = cos(/) and sin(^ + 2it) - sin(f} Thiii.

> < considering ; D and /

sqiaiatcly, we see that xif) does repeat jtself over every

mler-alof lTMgth xtt. However, as illustrated in Figure 1 16^ xij) al.so has a discontinuity

fit the time origin that does not recur al any other time. Since every feature in th^; shape of

a peritnJic signal must recur periodically, we conclude that the signal st)) isTiol periodic.

Sec 12

Tran$fcrmatians of the Independent Variable

13

-etc

n6 Figure

Tha signal xit) considered in Example 1.4,

1 .2.3 Even and Odd Signals

Anoiher sei of useful properties of signals relates lo iheir synfimetry under tiine revcrsiil.
A signal x{S) or x[t}] is referred to as an even sign&l if it is idettticd Lo its time- re versed
cruinteipait, i.e., with its reflection about the origin. In continuous time a signal is even if

xi-t) = x{t\

11.14)

while a disoreie-time signal is even if
x[-n] = x[n\.

(1 15)

A signal is referred lo as odd if

x(-i) = -xUl x[-n] - -x[nl

(1 16) (1.17)

= An odd signal must necessarily be Oat r = Oorrt 0, since eqs, (L 16) and (1 17) require
thaLjclO) ^ -j:(0)and Jr[0] = -jt[0]. Examples of even and odd tontinuous-time signals
are shown in Figure 1.17.

xft)

(a) x{t)

Figure 7 f . 1 (a) An even con-

tinuous-time signal; (b) an odd

Cb)

continuD US-time signal.

--

1*

Signals and Systems

Chap, t

- *--*
-3-3-1

12 3

;*.{xfrt]} - 1,n =
lilJllI
3-2-1 12 3

^.ri'va

^- n -- a
I

XLl -3-2-1
-111.¯^^

n Figure 1.1B Example of ttve evenOdd decomposition of a discrete-time
signal.

An iinportant fact Is that any signal can be broken into ^ sum of two signals, one of which is even and one of which is odd. To see this, consider ^e signal

^^ñ{AO] = :^[xU)^x(-0\

(LIS)

which is'i referred to as the even pan of x{i). Similarly, the <fddpan of x{t) is given by

Od{x{ti} - UxU^-x{-t)l

]J9)

It ii a simple exercise to check ihal: the even part is in fact even, that the odd part is odd.
and that x^t) is the sum of the two. Exacdy analogous definidotis hold in the discrete-
time case. An example of the even -odd decomposition of a discrete-time signal is given in Figure M8.

T.3 EXPONENTIAL AMD SlMUSOfOAL SIGNALS
In this section and the next^ we introduce several basic continuous-time and discrete-time
signals. Not only do these signals occur frequently* but they also serve as basic building
bLotks from wMch we can construct many other signals.

Sac. 1 .3

Exponential zr\6 Sinusoidal Signals

15

1.3.1 ContinuouS'Time Compfex Exponential
cind Sinusoidal Signals

The contjnuous-ttttie complex ejipartetztial signal is of the form

x{t) = C>^

(1.20)

C where and a are* it\ generaJ, compJex numbeis. Dejjending upon the values of ihese
parameters, the complex exponential can exhibit several different characteristics.

R^al Exponendat Sigruils

C As illustrated in Figure 1.19, if and o are real [in which <;ase x{t) is called a real h exponenttaf], there are basically two types of behavior. If a positive, then as t in-

creases jr(r) is a growing exponential, a form that is used in describing many different

physical proceises^ including chain reactions in atomic explosions and complex chemical

Tcacdons. If a is negative, then jr(f) is a decaying exponential, a signal thai i> alsn used

to describe a wide variety of phenom$na+ including the process of radioactive decay and

RC the responses of

circuits aod damped mechanical systems. In particular, as shou^Ti

in Problems 2.61 and 2,62, the natural responses of the circuit in Figure 1.1 and the
automobile in Figure 1.2 are decaying expenentials. Also, we note thaL for a = 0, x{r)

is coDstant.

Rgure 1.19 OQr^tinuous-tlme real

> exponantial x{t) =^ Cs^': {di] a 0;

(b)

(D) a < 0.

16

Signals and Systems

Chap. 1

Feriodic Complex ExponerUial ond Sinusoidal Signals
A second important class of complex exponentiais is obtained by constraining d to be
purely imaginary. Specifically, consider

= x(t)

e^""''.

n.21)

An impurtant property of this signal is that it is periodic. To verify this, we recalt from T eq. ( 1 . 1 1> that x{t) will be periodic with period if

Or, siTict

(1.22)

it foUowa that fot periodicity, 'we must have

<K23)
= ^ If otn 0. then x{t) = 1, which is periodic for any v^lue ^iT. If opo 0, then thefVin-
-- dajnenial period T^o *>f -v(^)-- that is, the smallest positive vaJue of T for which eq. (h23)
holds is

-
(J

2^
tiif^

(1.24)

Thus, the sigTiaK e^"^''^ and f J'""' have the same ftindamentai period.
A signal closely related to the periodic coniplex e:tponential is the sinusoidal ugnai

+ = xii)

Acos(tc)ui 4").

(1.25)

as illustrated in Figure L20. With seconds as the units off, theunii^ cf <^ and^jo are radians
and radians per second, respectively, li is alsn common to write a*o = 27rf^, where /fi has
the LLtiits of cycles per second, oi hertz <Hz). Like the complex exponential signal, the sinusoidal signal is penodic with fundamental period Tq given by eq, (1.24). Sinusoidal and

= + ?<(t}

A. cos [uJot

(fj)

Figure l.ZO Continuous -tune snu
sovdal signal.

.

7

S¨c 1 .3

Exponential and Sinusoidal Signals

1

complex exponential signals are also used to describe the characteristics of many physical
-- processes in particular, physical systems in which energy is conserved. For example, as

LC shown in Problem 2.61, Xht natural response of an

circuit is sinusoidal^ as is the simple

harmonic motivjn of a mechanical sysiem consisting of a mass connected by a spring to a

stationary support. The at:oustic pressure variations corresponding to a single musical tone

are also siinusoidal.

By using Euler's relation,^ the complex exptJnemia! meq, (1.21) can be written in

terms of siinusoidal signals with the same fundamental periwl:

+ - .jt^iii

cosciff^i jaintifQf.

(1 26)

Similarly, the sinusoidul signal of eq. 0-25) can be written in terms of periodic complex exponentials, again with tfie same fundamental period:

= + Acosfa>j>; + ^)

-e^'^'e^'"^''

-e"-f'^e ^"""

(1.27)

Note that the two exponentials in eq. (1.27 1 have complex amplitudes Alternatively, we
t:an express a sinusoid in terms of a complex exponential signal as

/lco>(aJof + ^) = A(fi^c^*'^^''*'},

(K28)

where, if c is a complex number, (R^{i:'} denotes its real part. We will also use the notation
S7n\c\ for the imagijuary pari of <% jso ihat, for example,

+ = AsiD(ft^o^ <^)

A^Trt{^''^'*'^'^\

{L29)

From eq, (1.24), we see that the fundameiital period To of a continuous -time sinu-
soidal signal or a periodic complex C)^|JOnential is inversely proportional to |woL which
wc will refer to as iht fundamentalfrequency. From Figure 1,2 1, we see graphically what this means, tf we decrease the magnitude of cao> we slow down the rate of oscillation atid
theretbre increase the period. Exactly the opposite effects occur if we increase the magnitude of wf(. Consider now the casew^o = 0. In this case, as we mentioned earlier, x{t) is constant and therefore is periodic with period T for any positive value of T. Thus, the
fundamental period of a conjjtant signal is undefined' On the other hand, there is no am-
biguity in defining the fundamental frequency of a constant signal to be ?:eTo. That is, a
constant i;ignal hait a iterorate of oscillation.
-- Periodic signals and in particular, the complex periodic exponential signal in
-- cq. (T21) arid the sinusoidal signal in eq. -25) provide important examples of signals
with infinite total energy but finite average power. For example, consider the periodic ex-
ponentiiil signal of eq. 2 \ (1 1 and suppose that we calculate the total energy and average
power in this :^ign^\ over one period:

Jo To
1

df - To,

(1.30J

^ELtlcr'brrlatmn Ýnd otfifr tvu^it KJea* n;]atrd to the maniptiJadf^n ofcorppijzx iHinibcT>; and expo ncnti^h ajt; considered ir tlit mathcmaliciil review section of die pToblemi at ihe end oftfie chapter.

18 Kt(t) ^ cos Wit

Signate arvd Syslftnis

Ct^ap. 1

Figure 1.21 Re lations h i p betw&en trie fundamental frequency ^nd period

for coniinuou5-tJme sintisoidai signals;

> > here, *>!

cti?

c*^, which implies

< < that 7]

Ts

Tj.

PfT-

()3J)

Since there are im infinite number of periods as t ranges from - ^ to +£, [he total energy
Integi^ted over all time is infinite. However, each period of the signaJ looks exactly the saitie. Since the average power of the signal equals 1 over e^ch period, averaging over multiple periods always yields an average power of 1 , That is, the cotnplex periodic ex-

Sec. 1 .3

Exponertia] and Sinusoidal Signals

t9

ponential sigitiil hiL<i finite average power equiil to

-- P. = bin -

= L le^'^^'^l^ dt

(1,32)

U Problem

provides additional examples of energy and power calcLilations for periotlit

aj^ aperiodic fiignal^.

Periodic cornplej: exponentials will play a central role in much of our treatment of

signals and systems, in part becaust; they serve as extremely useful building blocks for
many other signals. We will often find it useful to consider sets oi harmonicaUy related
-- complex exponentials that i?j, sets of periodic exponentials, all of which are periodic with
a common period Tjj. Specifically, a necessary condition far a complex expenential e^*^' tt>

be periodic with period To is that

^^^'^ - r

{}.m

wbicti implies that otTo is a multiple of 27r, i,e-,

- w7n

27rjt,

k = 0,Ýl,Ý2

fL34)

Thus, if wc define

^n = ^-

(1^35)

we see Lliat, to satisfy eq. { 1.34), ty must be an integer multiple of cuo That is, a harmoni-
cally tclftted serof ajrtipiex exponentTals is a set of periodic exponentials with fundamerttaJ frequencies that arc all multiples of a single positive fre^.uency (Oq:

- <i>!,(t)

e'^""^,

k = 0,ÝlÝ2

fl.36)

For k ^ 0, *^^(/) is a L^onstant, while for any other value of k,<hkit) is periodic with fun-
dart^ental frequency (jtjiyn and futidamental periud

The kth harmonic <^^(/) is still periodic with perionJ T^ as well, as it^oes through exactly
j^l of iLÈ; fundaTTiental periods during any time interval of length T^.
Our use of ihe term *'hannflnic" ss consistent with its use in music, where it refers
to tones resulting from variations in acoustic pressure at frequencies that are integer multiples of a fundamental frequency. For example^ the partem of vibrations of a string on an
-- instrument such as a violin can he described as a superposition^i.e., a weighted sum of
harmonically related perioilic estponentials. In Chapter 3, we will see thai we can build a
very rich class of periodic signals usii^ the harmonically related signals of eq. (1.36) as the building blocks
Example 1.5
tt is H)inetin]eH dearable to express the sum nf two complex exponentials as the prcduct of a single compleA exponential and a single sinusoid. For example, suppose we wish to

20

Signals and Systems

Chap. 1

plot the magnitude oF the ^i glial

x(0 ^ e'^ + e>Ali

a.3&)

To do tlnis, we firsi factor out a oroj^lex expwientiaE from (he nght side of eq. 0-35),
where the frequency of this exponential factor is taJtea as the average of the frequencies
flf 'he tvfct exponentials in the sutn. Ek>ing this, we obcain

whichj treatise &f Euler*s nelunon, can be rewritten as

= jc(0 2f^-^^'cos(0.J>?y

(L4Q)

Fnni3 ihiK we can directly ohtain an expression fflr the magnitude of x(_t}\

= \xU)\ 2\crjs{0.5t)[

{\A\]

Here, we have used tlie fact that the magnitude of the ccmplex exporential c - ^' is always
unity- Thus, {x(t)[ is what is commonly referred to as a full-wave retlified sinusoid, a.s
m shown Figure L22.

Èir

4-11'

6ti

Stt

t

Figure 1.22 The tull wave rectified sinusoid of Example 1.5.

General Complex Exponentuil Sisitals The mo&tgeneraJ case of a complex exponential can be expi^ssed and imeTpreted in terms of the two cases we have examined so far: [he real exponential and the periodic complex eJ^tientiai, Specificall)', consider a complex experiential Ce"**, where Cisi expressed in polar form atid a in recl^mgular form. That is.
C = |ck-

iUid
Then

^ + a

r

jai[).

Using Euler's relation, we can expand this further as

1-42)
0A3)

Sec 1 3

EJEponential and Slnt^soidal Signals

21

^d Thus. for f" = 0, thereat

imtiginary parts i^faccnipJeJt expanenti^J are fjinuKoidaJ. For

> r

they correspond to sinusoidal signals multiplied b> a growing exponential, and for

< r

they correspond to sinusoidaj signals tmilUpUed by a det:aying exponential. These

two cases are shown jr Figure 1.23. The dashed lines in the figure eojrestpond to the func-

tions Ý|r|e'^^ From eq. {\A2), we sec that \C\e^^ is the magniaide of the c:ornplex expo-
m nential. Thus, the dashed curves act as an envelope for the oscillatory curve the figurie

in that the pealcs of the oscillations just reach these curves, and in this way the envelope

provides ui with a convenient way to visualise the general trend iti the amplitude of the

Rgure 1 .23 (a) i3rowing siruÈOidal

- Signal pc{t)

Ce^ cos {wot -\- ^),

> J" 0; (bj decaying sinusoKf x(t) =

Sinusoidal signals multiplied by decaying exponent! ais are conunonly referred to as
damped ^^inuxoids^ Examples of damped sinusoids arise in the response of RLC circuits
and in mechanical systems containing both damping and restoring forces^ such as automotive suspensit>i] systems. These Idnds of systems have mechanisms that dissipate energy (resistors, damping fnrces such as frictioa) with oscillations that decay in time. Examples illuslrating such systems and their dumped sinusflidal natural responses t;an he found in Problems 2.61 and 2.62.

1 .3.2 Discrete-Time Complex Exporrential and Sinusoidaf Signals
As in continucus time, an important signal in discrete time is the complex expanentiai
sigjuil Oi seguence, defined by

x\n] -- Ca".

U.44)

22

Sifli^alS aiid Systen>s

Chap 1

where C and or are, in general, complex numbers. This cculd altemalivdy be expressed
in the fonr

x[n\ ^ C^\

(1,45)

where

a - e^.

Although the form of the discrete-time complex exponential sequence given in e^. (1.45> is more analogous to the form of the continuous-time exponential, it is often mure convenient to ejtpres.s the discrete -time complex exponential sequence in the form of e<5 (1 .4^).

Real Exponential Signals

C If and q; are reac, we can have one of several types of behavior, as illustrated in Fig-

> ure 1 .24. If (Ofj 1 the magnitudeofthesignalgrowsexponentially with;i,whilcif |a| < 1

^ we have a decaying exponential. Furthermore, if Of is positive, all the values Ca" are of

^ the saiTie sign, but if a is negative then the sign of x[n\ alternates. Note also that if a

\

m ^C then x\n] is aconstant, wliereas if a = -I, x\n] alternates value between

and -C,

Real -valued discrete-time exponentials are often used to describe population groiwth as

a function of generadon and tpta] return on investment as a fanDtiyn of day. month, ^t

quarter.

SittusoiJat Sighah

Another impottant i^omplsx exponential is obtained bj using the form given in cq. [IAS)

= and by constraiaing ^ to be purely imaginary (so that \ct\

1>. SpfccificuHy, consider

x[n] ^ e^"^^^.

a -46)

As in the continuous-time cast, this signal is closely related to the sinus^iidal signal

xM = ^cosCwtj/i + <irX

(1.47)

If we take n to be dimen&ionless, then both (do and i^ have units of radians Three exaitiptes of sinusoidal sequences are shown in Figure 1 .25.
As before, Euler's relation allows us to relate complex exponentials and sinusoids:

= ^j'^o"

co&ii>^n -^ J ^iniii^n

(1.43)

and

The signaii^ in fiq*. (1.46) and <1.47> are exajtiples ^f discrete-time signals with infinite
total energy but finitt avel^ge power. For example^ sirjce ]cJ'*'*"p ^ 1^ every sample of
die signal in eq. ( 1 .46) contributes 1 to the si^ial^s energy. Thus, the total energy for
-- < =e n <; 3o is iiifinite* while the average power per dme point is obviously equal to 1
Other examples of energy and power calculations for disciele-time signals are given in
Ptxjbleml.3.

Sac. 13

Exponential and Sinusoidal Signals

23

trTtTTTTll
(a)

Ulu llTTTtftt.**,'*
(b)
riji LI.I . T r. Tr.rT *t"*'*f '**^, ^t^^£
(c)

V ^^^^.^t^A 'i'i'iIVTi T
idf?

Figure 1 .24 The rea^ e>(jonen^hal
signal xiflj ^ Ca^.
(i)¨ >1;(b)0<a -r 1;
(c) -1 <a<0; (d}a^ -1

Z4

Signals and Systems

Chap. 1

K[n] - ctis{2TTn/12 J

L

I
{^}
K[n] - cos(8-TTnV3i;

*

*

(b)
x{n] - cos (fh/ej

^

VJl

:c)
Figure 1.Z5 Discrete-time sinusoidal signals.
General Complex Exponential Sigtuda
The general discrete-time complex exponential can be written and mteqsreied m terms of
real e?tjTOnent]ah and sinu^uidd sisals. Speeifitally, if we write C andiv in polar form.

Sec. 1 .3

Exponential and SinusoLfla! Signals

25

VIZ,,

C = \C\e^^

and

at

^

Vi^ \a\e

then

Ca" = [C\[a\" costiii^n + S) + j|C||arHin(iJon + ^>

(I-50>

TKusi, f{M !¨! = 1, the real and imaginary parts of a complex exponential sequence are sinusoidal. For |tt| < I they correripotid to sinusoidal set^uences multiplied by a decaying
> exponential, while for \a\ 1 they correspond to sinusoidal sequences muJtipUed by a
growing exptineniiai , Examples (jf these .signals are -depicted in Figure 1 .26.

ITT .vfrrTTTV
mTT
(a)

r r

^jiljK
^Tunr

illXi^

(b)

Figure 1.26 (a) Growing discrete-time 5inusofctal signals; (b) decaying
discreite-tfrne sinusoid.
T .3-3 Periodicity Properties of Discrete-Time Complex Exponentials
While there are many similarities between continiiou5-^time and discrete-time signals, there are also a number of important <^fFerences, Oiie i>f these c<>ncems the discrete-tiioe e>;p[)nential signal e-''^"". In Section 1.3.1, we identified the following two properties of iu

26

Signals ^FKl Systems

Chap. 1

cyntinuous-time counterpart e^'^"' : ( I ) the larger the magnitude of wo* the higher is the rale
of o^illation in the signal; and (2) e^'^'>' is periodic for any value of <f>o- ^^ ^^^ section we describe the discrete-time versions of both of these properties, and as we wiU see, there
are de^nite differenties between each of these and its contLnuous-time counterpart. The fact that the first of the&e properties is different in discrete time i* a direct conse-
quence of another extremely important distinction between discrete-time and continuoustime complex cxpenentiaU. Spet^ificaJly* consider the discrete-time complex exponential with frequejicy <tju + 27r:

From eq, (L51), we see that the exponential at frequency cjo + S-jt is the same as that
at frequency &Jo. Thus, we have a y&ry different situation from the continuous-time ca$e>
^ in which the signals e^"*'^' are al) distinct for distinct values of cuo- discrete time, these

sigjiaJs are not distinct, as the signal with Frequency <iJo is identicaJ to the signals with

frequencies ti}^ :^ Itt^ (i}^ -- 47^, and so on. Therefore, in considering di^crete-time com-

plex exponentials, wc need only consider a frequency interval of length 27r in which to

choose (oq. Although, according to eq. (1.51), any interval of length Itt will do, on most

< ^ < occasions we will use the interval -^ <o(, lir ar die intenal --tt

^fj

tt.

Because of the periodicity implied by eq, (1,51), the signal e^"^^" does not have a

continually increasing rate of oscillation as cuq is incre^'^ed in magnitude. Rather, as il-

lustrated in Figure 1.27, as we increase wo from 0, we obtain signals that oscillate inore
= and more rapidly until we reach tuo tt. A^; we continue to increase tucj, we decrea^ the = rate of oscillation until we reach W[> 2ir, which produces the same constant sequence as = <i>fi 0. Therefore, the low-frequency (that is, slowly varying) discrete-time exponentials

have values of <t>o near 0£ 2'rr, and any other even multiple of -jt, while the high frequen-

Ý^ cies (corresponding tii rapid variations) are located near io^ =

and other odd multiples

of T. Note in panicular that for ojo ^ tt or any other odd multiple of ir.

ien ^= ,JiJ-n =(-!)",

(1.52)

so that this signal oscillates rapidly, changing sign at each point in time fas illustrated in Figure 1.27(e)l.
The second property we wish to consider concerns die periodicity of the discrete-
> time complex. exp<.>nential. In order for the signal e-"^¯" to be periodic with pentjd A/ 0£
we must have

or equivaletitly,

= e^'"^'^

1.

0-54)

m For eq. (1,54) to hold, w^N must be a multiple of 27r. That is, there must be an mieger
such that

M(jN = 3irm,

(1,55)

or cquivalently,

^ = w'

n.56)

---- I

ñ

ñ
I

..

:

^ 1 -II-

I I

I '

*

--

I

*TM
ñ^
'>

I^

¨
--
_

I^

I

^

--

I

ñ
_

I^
¨ -^^

r*
w
*

oift -

Pi

oJT

II

'

K

'

:

,£

;

!
"'
iñ
--" .

*
---4

¨ *
3¨4

ñ

II

*

1

'2

'a

K

*
1
s?

d
;

h

4

IN

*

'
*

* *

a
v:
'

£

4

4

£

£
-ñ i*
*

27

^8

Eignais and Systems

Chap. )

According to eq. (L56X the signal e^'^" is periodic if &>o/27r is a rational number and h

not periodic otherwise. These same observations aiso hold for discrete-time sinusoids. For

ejcampie, the signals depicted in Figure 1. 25(a) and (b) are periodic, while the signal in Figure 1.25(c) is not.

Using the calculations that we have just made, we can also determine the funda-

nientat period and frequency of discrete-time complex exponentials, where we define the

fundamental fre<5iiency of a discrete- time periodic signal as we did in continuous time.

That is, if jc[fl3 is periodic with fundamenul period N, its fundamental frequency is 2w/Nr

Consider, then, a periodic complex expwnencial x\n] = e^'^'^" with wo ?^ 0. As we have

m just seen, Wo must satisfy eq. (1 ,56) for some pair of integers and .V, with A^ > 0. In

^ m [Yohlem 1.35, it is shown that if wq

and if jV and have no fac:tor=f in common, then

Ihe fundamental period of x[n\ is AT. Using this fact together with eq. <1 .56), we find that

the fundamental frequency of the periodic signal e-^^^" is

-- 2tt wn
= -Ys

(1-57)

Note that the fundamental period can also be written as

N = TMg),

0.58)

These last two expressions again differ from their continuous-time counieipaTts. In

Table

IJ ,

we

have

summarized

some

of the

differences

between

the

continuous-time

sig-

nal e^"^' and the discrete-time signai e^'^"". Note that, as in the continuous-time case, the

constant discrete-time signal resuhing from setting w^] = has a fundamental frequency

of zero, and its fundamental period is undefined

TABLE l.l Compahson of the signals e^' and e^".

eJ^-r

Di>>Linct signals for distinct vaJue* of ft>i)
Periodic fur any choice of wu
Fundameuiiil frequency ¨rj Fundamental period
ui^ - 0: undefined

Identical si^alE fur values ^f ci^^ separated by multiples of 2it
Periodic only if t^a = 2^miN for mnw in:eÈ¨r^ N ^OznAm
TnindaitienLi] frequency' Myjfm
Fundametttal pcnod*
a^y ^ qndefined

m 'A.ismne& that and A' dn not have any factors in common.

To gain some additional insight into these properties, let us examine again the signals

= depicted in Figure 1.25. First, consider die sequence x[n] cos(2Trn/12), depictod in

Figure 1.25(a), which we can think of as the sctof samples of the continuous-time sinusoid

= A(0

t;os(2ir/yi2) at integer dme points. In this cast, x{t) is periodic with fundamental

period 12and.T[fjJ is also periodic with fundamental period 12. That is, the values f)ix\n\

repeat every 12 ptiints, exactly in ^tep with the fundamcnial period of j^O-

Sec. 1.3

Exponential and Slnusofdal Signals

29

In contrast, consider che signal \[ti] = cos{S7t/31), depicted in Figure 1.25(b\ which we can view as the set of samples of M/) = cos<87r^/3I) at itiieger points in time. In this case, x(t) is periodic with fiindamental period 31/+. On the other hand, x\7i] li pe-
nodic with fundamental period 31, The reason for this difference is that the discrete-time
signal is defined only for integer values of the independent variable. Thus, there is no
sample at time I = 31/4, when x(Ocoti^pletesone period [starting fromf = 0). Similarly, ihere is no sample at r - 2 31/4 or r - 3 - 31/4. when x{t) has completed two or three periods, but there is a sample at È ^ 4-31/4 ^ 31, when x(0 has completed /our perioJs.
This can be seen in Figure 1.25(b), where the pattern of j|nj values does not repeat with each single cycle of positive and negative values. Rather, the pattern repciits after tour such iryclcs, munely, every 31 points.
SimilarLy, the signaL xIk] = cos(rt/6) can be viewed as the set of samples tjf the signal xH) = cos(//6) at integer lime points. In this case, the values of x(r) at integer
sample points never repeat, as theic sample poinbi never ^ipsin an interval that is an exjci multiple of the period, 127r, cf x{ry Thus, x[n] is not periodic, although the eye visually interpolates between the sample pointn, suggesting the envelope x{n, which is periodic.
The use of the concept of sampling to gain insight into the periodicity of discrete -time sinusoidal sequences is explored further ift Problem 1 36,

Example 1 .6
Suppose That we wish to deiermine the fundamental period of the discrete -time styu-.A

The tirsi eiponeniialon the right-hand side of eq. (1.59) has a fundMncntal pLrntuJ i^i ^

While this can be verified from eq, (1 ,58). there is a simpler way to obtain thai answer 1 n

particuiar, note that the angle (2ir/3)fl of the first term must be mcremented hy a muhiple

We 2^ of

fficthe vaiui^b. ufthi!^ exponential to begin repeating.

then immediaitly see thai

if fl IS incxemented by 3, the angle ^vill be incremented by a single muUiple vyf2ir. Vvnh
regard t,> the set:ond term, we see that incnsmenting the angle (3Tr/4)n by 2Tr would

require: a to be intremcnied by E/3, which is impossible^ since n h restritJltid to being ;in

integer. Similarly, incTementing the angle by ^tt would require a noninteger increit^ent

of 16/3 to n. However, incrementing the angle by 6ir reqiiires an increment of S to n.

and thus the fundamental period of the ^^cond term i^ ^.

NdWh for the tntire signal x[n.] ui r*;peat, eai:h of the terms in eq. {1.59) muit gi

through an i.megef number nf its o\^n rundamental period The smaUtsl itvcrtint:!!! yf ji

that accomplislie^ this is 24, That is, over an interval of 24 pointy the frst term on ^c

nght-hand side of ty^, (1 59} will have gone thnmgh cLght of its fundamental periods, the

second tii^m through three of its fundamental penods, and (he overall iignai r[nj rhrounb

exactly nne cf its funJamental periods.

.\s in t^ontinuous time, it is also of considerable value in discrete-time signal and
-- system analysis to consider sets of hartnonically related peritidic exponeniialy that is,
fferiodic exponentials with a common period N, From cq. (1 .56), we know that these ;irt
precisely the signals which are at freqtiencics ^vhich are multiples of Itt/N. That is.

.

BO

Signals and Systems

Chap, t

In thecontmatsQS Lime ca.se, all of the harmonically related complex exponentials ^^^t^wrjr

-- k

0. Ýi. Ý2, . .J aie distitict. However, b6caus& uf eq. (\-51)i this is nor the case in

discrele time Specifically,

N This implies that there are otily distinct periodic exponentials in the set given in
eq. (1.60). ForeTcample,

Mn. = - Uif>,\n]

e'"""'^^', 42[M = ^'""'^''

^ 4':^ -i[rt]

'^"^^ e^^""^"'

(1,62)

are a.l] distinct, and any other (^J¨] is identical to on& of these (e.g,, <^a[i] = ^i"] and

1.4 THE UNIT IMPULSE AND UN FT STEP FUNCTIONS

-- we In this section,

introduce se:veral other basic signals specifically, the unit impulse and

m -- siep tiinction^ ctmtinuous and discrete time that are also of considerable impertance in

signal and system analysis. In Chapter 2, we will see how we can use unit impulse signals

ai basic building blocks for the construction and representation of other signals. We begin

i^ith the discrete -time case.

1 .4. 1 The Discrete^Time Unit Impulse and Unit Step Sequences
One of the simplest discrete-time signs^s is the unit impuise (ot unii iitmple\ which is
defined as

and which is shown in Figure J,2&. Throughout the book, we will refer to 6 [h] interchange-
ably as the unit impulse or unit sample.

SlT^I

.'I ^

B

Bt

Figure 1 .23 Discrfite-ilme unit im^ pulse fsample).

A second basic discrete-time signal is the discrete-time unit step, denoted by ¨[/i]
and defined by

The umt step sequence is shown in Figure 1.2^.

Sec. 1.4

The Init Impulse anct Unit Step Functions

31

uH

Figure r. 2 9 Discrete-time jn it Step
" s¨quenc¨.

Interval ot aumTn^tton

Hm

i^'i
interval o-f summation
5[m)

"^ Figure 1.30 Runnkng sum of

(t>)

> eq (1.66|: (a):?--- 0, ;b) J7

There is a close relationship between the discrete-tiine unit Impulse and Lnit step. In parEicular, the discrete -time unit impulse is the first difference t>f the distrete-time step

5[n] = u[n]- u[ft- 1].

{1.65)

Conversely^ the discrete-time unit step is the ninnin^ sum of the unit sample. That is.

M[n] = ">" 6Ym\.

n.66)

EquiiUon (1.66) is illu'itrated graphically in Figure 130, Since iJie only non/.ero vjlIqc of

we the ticiit sample is at the point at which its argument is zero,

see fram the figure that the

^ running sum in eq. (1.66) is for n < and 1 for t

0. Furthermore, by changing the

m -- m variable of summation from to fc

n - in eq, <K66), we find that thk: discrete- lime

unit step can also be \Mitten in terms of the unit sample as

or cquivalently,

X^t"" u[n-\ ^

'^^'

= '-
1^.

(1

I

ii

5[n-k]

Interval of sjmmation

*

Signals ^nd Systems

Ghap 1

Interval tjf surtrmatiwi.
6(n-k]

Figure f.3l Relationship piv^n in

> eq. (1,67): [a) /i< 0; (b) n

Q.

tquaiion (1.67) is illustrated in Figure IJI. In this case the nonzero value of fi[tt - k\ is

at the value of k equal lo n, so ihm again we see that the summaiion in eq. (1.67) is for

n<

^ and 1 for ¨

0.

An inteqsnetation of eq. (1.67) is as a superposition of delayed impulses; i.e , we tan

= view the equation as the sum of a unit impulse S[n] at n 0, a unit impulse b{n - 1 1 at

We H = U another, S[n -- 2], ^t n ^ 2^ etc.

will malLe explicit ust of this interpretation in

Chapter 2.

The unit impulse sequence can be used to sample the vaJue of a signal at a = 0. In
particular, since S^h] is nonzeni (and equal to 1) ordy for ¨ = 0, ]t folbws that

x[n]6{n] =^ x[0]6[n].
Morts generally, if we consider a unit impulse 6[n -- noJatn = rt^, then

OM)

(1-69)
This samplij^ property (jf the unit impulse will play an important role in Chapters and?.

JA.2 The Continuous-Time Unit Step and Unit fmpuJse Functions
The continuous-liine unii step junction w(/) is defined in a manner similar to its discrete-
time counterpart. Specifically,

<0 £(0 - 0. r

> 1,

/

(J. 70]

as is shown in Figure 1,32. .Vote that the unit step is discommuous at r =- 0, The continuous -Time unit impulsefunction fi(r) is related to the unit step in a mamier analogous

Sec. 1.4

The Unrt Impulse and UnilStep FunctiDfis

33

m

Figure 1.32 Contrnuous-time jnit
t Step function.

to the relationship between the dificrete-time unit impulse an*^ step functions- Tn particular, the continuous-time unit step is tiie riaminff integral of the unit impulse

¨<0

b{r)dr.

(1.71)

This <iii£o suggests a tielntionship between 3u) and nit) an^ogous to the expression for
6[rt] in eq. (1.65). In paiticuLar, it follows from cq. (1.71) that the continuous-time unic impulse can be thought of as the^rjf dtrivatwe of the continuous-tiuie unit step:

6(0 = dujt)
dt

(1-72)

In contrast to Ýe discr&te-time case, there is some formal difticulty with this equa-
tion as a representation of the unit impulse function^ since ¨(f) is discontinuous at r =
and consequently is formally not diffeimtiable. Wc can, however, interpret eq. (1.72) by
considering an apprv)?(imation to Che unit step u^{i)^ as illustrated in Figure 1.33, which
rises from the value to the value 1 ii^ a short tinxe interval of length A. The ^init step,
of course, changes values instantaneously and thus can be thought of as an ideaiization of
u\{t) for A so short that its duratiou doeiiti't matter for any practical purpose. FormaUy, A ii{ty is the limit of u^,it) as --> 0. Let us now consider the derivative

as sh&wn in Figure 1 .34.

5i</) =

'
dt

(1-73)

Uitt)

6i(l)

I

\

K

Figure 1 .33 Continuous appraximatic^n to
tti( unit step, iii(f).

i Figure t.34 Derivative at

34 m)
1-

Signals antl Systems

C^ap. 1

k ^(t) k,
L

t
Figure 1.35 Cofltinuous-
[ime unit impjise.

t
Figure 136 Sca¨d im-
pulse.

i Note that ^a(/> is a short pulse^ of duration and v^ilh unit area for any value of A. As A -> f>,Si(Ol>etoTnes narrower and higher, m^ntajningits uniitare^- Its limiting form,
(1.74)

i can then bethought of as an LdealLzaiionof the short pulse ^:i(r) as the duration becomes
insigmftcant. Since 6<i> has, in effect, no durattorY bvit unit area, we adopi the graphicai notation for it shown in Figure J 35. ^here the arrow at f = indicates that the area of the = pulse is concentrated at ; and the height of the arrow and the "V^ next to the arrow
are used to represent ihitarea of the Impulse. More generally, a scaled jmpulse kSu; will
have an area ft , and thus.

kS{T}clT = kuia

A scaled impulse with area k is ihown in Figure 136, where the height of the arrow used

to depict the scaled impulse is chosen to be proptjrtional to the area of the impulse.

A?> with discrete time, we can provide a simple graphical interpretation of the tunning

M. integral t)f ev^. (1 .71), this is shown in Figure 1

Since the area of the continuous-time

< unit impuJse 5(7") is concciitrated at r = 0, we see that the mnning integral is for T fJ
> U and I for / 0. Also, we note that the rektioxtship in eq. 71 ) between the continuous-

time unit step and impulse can be rewritten in a different form, analogous to the discrete-
time fom:i in cq. < i .fi?^ by changing the variable of integration from t to (x =^ t - r:

uif) =

f<>
S{T)dT -= Sa-<r]{-(ifTX

or equivalents.

= i*(.f)

Su - a^d^.

a.75>

The graphical interpretation of ihij* form of the relationship between uU\ and &\iy\^

given in Figuie US. Since in this case the area of fi(f - <j\ is concentrated at the point

/< cr ^ /, we again see that the integral in eq. ( 1 .75) is for

and I for t ^- f). This type

of graphical interpretation of the behavior of the unit impulse under integration will be

extrcmelj useful in Chapter 2.

Sec. 1.4

The Unit Impiilseand Unit Step Functions

35

Interval of integration

.M^)

{a)
Jnlefval of mtegmtion

5{1-<T)

Interval of integral iQTi

<T (a)
Intecval of mtegralion 6(t-al

(b)

Figure 1.37 Running integral given in ¨q (171):

< > (a) t

0. ^b) t

f.b)

Figure T. 3a Relationship given in eq (175):

< > (a) ?

0; (b) f

0.

As with the di^rete-tJme impulse, the continuous-time impulse has a very important sampling property. In particular, for a number of rea^sonN it will be imDortnnt to consider the product of an impulse and more well-behaved continuous- time functions xU^. The in-
terpretation t)f this quantity i.^ most readily developed using the definition of 6 (/) according to eq. (1-74), Specifically, consider

In Figure ]..lQ(a) we have depicted the two time functions jcit} and 5i(n, ard in Figure 1 39(b) we see an enlarged view of the nonzera portion of their product. By construc-

^ A tion. Xi(t) is zero outside the interval

; t^ A. For sufficiently smail so that ji{:) is

app(roxim:itely constant over this mterval.

A Since 5(;) is the limit as

t^f fii<;), it ft3llows that

(176)
By the same argument, we have 4n analogous expression far an impulse concentrated at
an arbitrary point, say, r^ That is.
x{m(t-to) = Mh)Hf -Ta).

36

Signals and Systems

Chap. 1

5a<0

Figure T.J9 The product x(f)^i(n.

(a) graphs of both functions; {hi en-

iarged view of the nonzero portion af

[b>

their product

Although ojr tliscussioti af the unit impulse in this section has been somewliat infcimial, it does provide us with some important intuition about this signal that vvLll be
useful throughout the book. As we have stated, the nnit impulse shouM be viewed as an idealization. As we illustrate and discuss in more detail ir. Section 2.5, any real physi-
cal system has sonae inertia associated with it and thiis doe> not respond instantansously to inputs. Coitsequently, if a pul&e of sufficiently short duriilion \^ applied to such a system, the system response will not be noticeably influenced by the pulse's duration or by the details of the shape of the pulse> for that matter. Instead, (he primary charat:tenstit;
-- of the pulse that will matter \b the net, integrated effect of ibe pulse i.e., Jts area. For
systems that respond much more quickly than others, the gylse will hiive to be of much
shorter liuratiun before the details af the pulse shape or its duration njo longer mailer Nev-
-- ertheless, for any phy^jical system, we can always find a pulse that is *'short enough/
The unit impulse then is an idedization of this concept L'le puls^ that is short enough
for any system. As we wih see in Chapter 2, the response of a Eysiera to this idealized
pulse plays a crucial role in iiignal and system analysis, ind in the process of developing and understanding this role, vfe will develop additional insight into the idealised
signal.^
^Tlie unit iJiipulsic ^nd yther rdaEed fitnctioRi (which are cften collec;tivcly referred 14> as -yin^Hiarirv fur.ctions) have been thftroughly studied in the firtd of mathematics undtr the al[crnat]v-c njmci of ^ena-ai-
n^i f£m:(-i^rii and the theory cf distrrbittioris For moi^ del^JIcd di scu^siivn^ -of th]> suhjfCt, see Oissnbution
Thcorv and Tran^onn Anaiysu, by A. H Zemantar (New YorJc McGra;y-Kill Book Company, 1^65), Orn-
ernlised tunctioRs. by R.F Hrskjn^ (Ntw Ëf>rk. Halved Pres*;^ 1979). or the mors advdnted [t;\i, Founer ATulyxi! ^nd (Jtn^ruhzed turKtiom, by M. J Lighthill {New \ort: Cftmbndge Untversity F-re^iS. 195S> Our disi;u^!>ii>rL of imgujaniy funtUoris in Section 25 ii closely related in spirit to Uie maifieinatica] theory
m dcscnfcjcd. these texts aJld thu^, provides, an infonn&l inlroducrion to concepts shat underlie thli l:ipic H!
tnathcmaliij^.

Sec. 1,4

The Unit Impulse and Unit Step Fjtictions

37

Example 1 J

Cont-ider Iht discontinuojs signal x{t\ depicted in Figurt 1,40(^). Because of the rela-
tionship betvtseti ihe eontLnuous-time unit impiulse and unit step, we can readily calculate

and gj^ph the derivative of thit signal. Specifically, the derivative of i(0 i^ cleaiy 0,

eic&pt at the dLsconlinuiUcs, In the case of the unit slep^ we have seen [eq. \ \JT)\ that

differentiation gives rise lÈ> 'a unit impiiUe located at the point of discontinuity. Further-

tnore.by multiplying twth sidesof eq, (1 72^ by any number A^ we see that the derivative

of a unit step with n distynlinuity of si/È k gives rise to an impulse of area k at the pcint

mk of discontinuity. Thii

also holdft far any other signal with a jump discontinuityn suth

as x{t') in Figure 1.40(a). Ctmsequcntly. we can sketch its derivative i(f), as in Fig-

ure 1.40fbK where an impul&c is placed at each discontinuity of jf(r), with area equal tu

m the sue ot the discontinuity. Nutc, for example, diat the di^ontinuity

= x{\) at f

2

hasavalLieof 3.ho (hut an impube^ealedi^y -3 is located at/ - 2 in the signal x(0.

xft)
2
1
23
(a)

X[tJ
2
JL
1--
-1

)I
2Z
t

-È ,~

1'
-3
r

y--^
/l

-Interval of mtegraticm

,

JL

~1
1 1 1 1

23

\1

4

-1

-2 --

'

-3 -

^

(b)
t
(cl
T

Figure t.40 (a) The discontiruaus signal x{t) analyzed in E^^ampie 17,
(b) its derivative j^rjo. (c) depiction of the recovery of x{t) as the running inte grai of x(f), iiljstrated for a vaiue of { between and 1.

38

Signals and Systems

Chap 1

As a check of our result, we can verify that we tan recover jfO ffom xUl Specif^ ically, since x(ii and x{0 are boih zero for / 0. we need only check thai for / >0,

-r ^(0

x{T)dT.

77)

< As illustrated in Figure 1.40(cX fort 1, the integral on the right-hand side of e<i. (1.77)

is zero, sijice none of the impulses thai constitute i(/) are within the interval of imegra-

< = tion. For I r < 2, the first impulse (located at /

1) is the only one within the inte-

gtiilioti interval, and thus the integral In eq. (1 .77) equals 2, the area of this impulse. For

< 2 < f 4h the first two impulses are within the interval of integraiion, and the integml

2-3 actumulaies Ae sum of both of their areas, namely,

- > =

1. Finally, for f

4, all

-- 2-3 2= three impulses are within the integration interval, so that the imegraJ equ^R the sum of

all three areas thai is,

+

+1. The result ii^ exactly the signal xit) depicted

in Figure 1 .4tKa)

1.5 CONTlNUOUS-nMEAND DISCRETE-TIME SYSTEMS

Physical systenis in the broadest sense are sj\ interconnection of components, devices,

ar subsystems. In contexts ranging from signal processing and communications to elec-

tromechanical motors, automotive vehicles, and chemical-processing plants, a yy.\tem can

be viewed as a process in which input signals are transformed by the system or cause the

system to respond in some way, resulting in other signals as outputs. For example, a high-

fidebty system takes a recorded audio signal and generates a reproduction of that signal

If the hi-fi system has tone controls, we can change the tonal quality of the reproduced sig-

vM nal. Similarly, the circuit in Figure LI can be viewed as a system with input voltage

vM, and output voltage

while the automobile in Figure 1 .2 can be thought of as a system

with input equal to the force /<r) and output equal to the velocity vit) of the vehicle. An

image-enhaticemetit system transforms an input image into an output image that ha.s some

desired properties, such as improved contrast.

A continutfus-time system is a system in which continuous-time input signals are

applied and result in continuous-time output signals. Such a system will be represented

pictoriaUy as In Figure h41(a), where xit) is the input and yit) is die output. Alternatively, we will often represent the inputoutput relation of a continuous-tmie system by the

notation

xit) -^ y\t).

(1.78J

CoritinLOus-time

wft)

^!f[t)

systftn

(a)

Jtn

Discrvte-time

*-y(nl

:3yst0in

Fhgure 1.41 (a) Contlnuous-tjme

lb)

system; {b) discrete -time system.

Sec. 1 5

Continuous-Time and Discfete-Tinne Systems

39

-- Simiiarly^ a discrete-time systetti that isi, a system that transforms discreie-timc inputs -- into discrete -time outpiiL'; will be depicted as in Figure 1.41 (b) and will sonnetimes be
represented syttibolicaUy as

J[nj -* y{nV

(1.79)

In most of this book, we will treat discrete-time systems and continuous -time systems separately but in parallel. In Chapter 1, we will bring continuous-time and discre(e-time systems together through the concept of sampling, and we will develop some in^iight!^;
into the use of discrete-tinae systems to process contimioas-time signals that have been sampled.

f . 5. T Simple Exampres of Systems
On¨ of the most important motivations for the development of general tools for analyzing 4nd designing systems is that systems from many different applications have very similar mathematical descriptions. To illustrate this, we begin with a few simple examples.

Example l.d

RC Consider the

circuit depicted in Figure we 1 .1 . if regard v^(f) as the input signal and

v^W} as the output signal, then we can use simple circuit analysis to denve an equation

describing the reiationshLp between the iaput and output, Specilically, fcx^ni Ohm's law,

the current i{j) through the resi&tm: is proportional (with proportionaluy con.stant MR) to

the voltage drop across the res^islor; i.e.,

---- lU^ =

zr^^-

(ISO)

Similarly, using the defining constitutive relation for a capacitor, we can relate if/) to the
rate of change with time of the voltage across the capacit;£r

Equating the right-hand sides of eqs. (1.80) and (1.81), we obtain a differential equation describing the relationship between the mpui v,(/) ajid the output vdty.

dvjt)

1

1

ExfimpJe T ,9
Consider Figure L2, in which we regard the force /(O as the input and the velocity \r{t)
m as the output. If we let denote the mass of the automobile and mpv the resistance due
-- -- to friction, then equating acceleration i.e., the time derivative of vehnzily with net
force divided by mass, we obtain

40

Signals and Systems

Chap 1

I.e.,

dv(t) p

J

at

ttt

ftt

Exiimining ^nd compariag eqi, (1.82) and nS4>in the above exainp left, we see thai
tfie input-output relationships captured in these two equations for these two very different physicaJ systems are basically the same. In partit:ular, they are both examples of first-order linear differential equations of :he form

-^ +fly(r>^ Mo.

85)

where x(t) is the input, y{r) is the output, and a and 6 are constants. Thi^ i^ one very simpJe example of the fact that, by developing methods for analyzing general classes of systems
such a& that represented by eq, (1.E5), we will be able to use thein in a wide variety of
applications.

Exampre 1,10

Asa .simple example of a discrete-time system, cionfiideT a simple model tor the balance
in a bank account from month to month- Specifically, lei y[t\] denote the balance at the end of the nth month, and suppose thai. y\n] evtWes from month to month according it>
the equation

y[nl = 1.01v[n- 11 + j[nj.

O-Sti)

or equivalenUy,

vtrt]- ;.oi^[n- ij - 4nj,

ii.^i)

\vheTt Ji[n] represents the net deposit (i.e , deposits minus withdrawals) during the n\h
month and the term l.CIyfrt- 11 models the fact that we accme^r%interen each monUi.

Example 1.11

As h second -example, consider a simple digital simulation of che differential equation in

A eq (lr84) in which we resolve lime into discrete intervals of length and approxiniate

= dv{tyfdt a[ f

ftA by the first baekward difference, i.e.,

KflA") -_ v{{n - 1>A)

"A

we In this case, if

let vlfii

=

v(nA)and/In]

=

/(nAj,weobiain thefolJtTwmgdiscrtt*!'

time model relatmg the sampled signals /[nj and i>lnl:

Comparing eqs. i\ .87) snd (1 .S8), we see that they are both examples of th? same general first-order linear difference equation, namely

Sec. 1.5

ContinuousTime and Discrete-Time Systems

41

As the preceding examples suggest, the mathematical descriptions of systems froin

a wide variety of applicationii frequently have a great deal in common, and it is this fact

thai provides considerabJe motivation for the deveJopment of broadly applicable tools for

signal and system analysis The key to doing this ^iuccessfully is identifying cliLsses of

systems that have two important characteristics: (1) The systems in this class have prop-

erties and strut^tureK that we can exploit to gain insight into their behavior and to develop

effective tools for their analysis; and (2) many systems of practical imponance can be

accurately modeled using systems in this class. It is on the first of these characteristics

that most of this btjok fycuses, as we develop tools for a panicular class of systems re-

ferred to as linear, time-invariant systems. In the next section, we will introduce the piop-

crtie-^ that characterize this tlass^ as well as a number of uther very important ba^sit; system

properties.

The second characieristic mentioned in the preceding paragraph is of obvious impor-

tance for any system analysis technique to be of value in practice. It is a well-established

fact that a wide range of physical systems (including those in Examples 1. 8-1. 10) can
m be v^ell modeled within the class of systems on which we focus this book. However,

a critical point is that any model used in describing o' anaJy^ing a physical system lep-

rcsenis an idealization of that system, and thus, any resulting analysis is only as good

m as the model itself For example, the simple linear niwdel of a resistor

e^j. (1 80)

and that of a capacitor in eq. (1.81) are idealizations. However, these idealizations are

quite accurate for real resistors iind capacitors in many applications, and thus, analy-

ses employing such idealizations provide useful results and conclusions, as long a.s the voltages and ctinrents remain within the operating conditions under which these simple

linear models are valid. Similarly, the use of a linear retarding force to represent fnc-

tional effecti in eq. (1.83) is an appro ximation with a range of validity. Consequently,
although we will not address this issue in the book, it is important to remember that an essential component of engineering practice in using the methods wc develop here

consists of identifying the range of validity of the assumptions that have gone into a model and erisuring that any analysis or design based on that model does nat violate those

assumptions.

1 ,5,2 Interconnections of Systems
An important idea that wc will use throughout this book is the concept of the interconnecdon of systems. Many real systems are built as interconnections of several subsystems. One example i.s an audio system, which involves the intercomicction of a radio receiver,
compact disc player, or tapodeck with an amplifier and one or more speakers. Another is a digitally controlled aircraft, which is an interconnection of the aircraft, described by its equaiions of motion and die aerodynamic forces affecting it: the sensors, which measure various aircraft variables such a.s accelerations, rotation rates, and heading; a digital au-
topilot, which responds to the measured variables and to command inputs from the pilot
(e.g., the de^sired course, altitude, and speed); and the aircraft's actuators, which respond to inputs provided by the autopilot in order to use the aircraft control surfaces (rudder,
tail, ailerons) to change the aerodynamic forces on the aircraft. By viewing such a system as an interconnection of its components, we can use oiu- understanding of the component

42

Signals and Systems

Chap. 1

input '

System 1

System 2

{a}

Output

Inpjt

System 1
System 2
(t>)

SyEtom 1

System 2 1
<ñ

Systems

OjtpiJt

Output

Figure 1.42 Intercoinecticn of two syslems: (a) series (cascade) intercon-
nection; (b) parallel fnterconnection, fc) series-parall&l inlercohnectfon.

systems and of how they are interconnected in order to analyze the operatjon and behavior

of the overall system. In addition, by descnbing ii system in terms of an interconiiecdoti of
simpler subsystems, we may in fact be able to define useful ways in which tu synthesize
complex systems out of simpler, basic building blocks.

While one can constnici a variety of system interconnections, theie are several bii^sic
A ores that are frequently encountered series at cascade ifUetvonnecmn of cwo systems

is illustrated in Figure 1 .42(a). Diagrams such as this are referred to as hio<-k diagnims

Here, the output of System 1 is the input to System 2. and the overall system tratisforms
an input by processing it first by System 1 and then by System 2. An example of a series

interconnection is a radio receiver fc4Jowed by an amplifier. Similarly^ tine can define a

series irterconnection of three or more systems.

Aparalie! mrerconn^ctitjnhUv^o systems is illustrated in Figure 1 -42(b). Here, the

'W same input signal is applied to Systems i and 2. The symbol

in (he figure denotes

addition, so that the output of the parallel interconnection is the sum of the outputs of Systems 1 and 2. An example of a parallel interconnection is a simple audio system with

several microphones feeding into a single amplifier.and speaker system. In addition to the
simple parallel interconnection in Figure 1 .42(b), we can define parallel inierconnections
of more than two systems, and we can combine btitb cascade and parallel intcrtronnections

Sec, 1,5

Continuous-Time and Discrete-Time Systems

43

IrtpLt

J^ ^
c

^* System 1

Output

SysteiD 2

tjon.

Feedback interconnec-

to obtain more complicated interconneciions. An example of such an interconnet^liun is
given in Figure 1.42(c),''
Another imponani type of system interc^mnection is a.feeÈJhack inr^rconnection. an example of which is illustrated in Figure 1.43. Here, the output of System 1 is the input to System 2, while the output of System 2 is fed back and added to the external input to produce the actual input to System I , Feedback systems arise in a wide variety of applications. For example, a cruise control system on an automobile senses the vehicle's velocity and adjusts the fuel flow in onler to keep the spee<i at the desired level. Sirnilarly. a digitally controlled aircraft is most naturally thought of as a feedback &y&tem in which differences between actual and desired speed, heading, or altitude are fed back tJirough the autopilot in order to correct these discrepancies. Also, electrical circuits are often usefully viewed as containing feedback interconnections. As an example, consider the circuit depicted in
Figure 1.44(a). As indicated in Figure 1 .44ib). this system can be viewed as the feedback
interconnection of the two circuit elements.

iit)

ii(t)

G>

Capacitor

*^v(t)

isW

Resistor

v(t) -*

i.(t)=:^

Figure 1 .44 {a} Simpte electrical oircult; (b) block diagram ir which the
circuit IS depicted as ttie feedback jnterconnection of two circuit eiements.

Û ""Otl wx^Mnn, we will also use the symtH^L in our pictorial rcpreseiitatif>n of sVilcmi lo dencrte the
upcration of multipl>iiig two ^i^naU (icc, for e]iainpk. Figure 4.26)

44

Sigr>als and Systems

Chap. 1

1 .6 BAS/C SYSTEM PROPERTIES
In this stectjon we introduce and discuss a number of basic properties of continuous-time
and discrete-time systems. The&e properties have important physical interpretations and relaiiv&ly simple nnathematical descriptions u*;ing the signals and systems language that
we have begun to develop.

T.6,T Systems wfth and without Memory
A system is said to be memoryless if its output for each value of the independent variable
at a given time is dependent only on the input at that s^me dme. For example, the system specified by the rel^ilionship

is memoryless, as the value of y[n] at any particuiar time no depends only on the value of x[n] at that time. Similarly, avesisvot is a mtmoryless system; with the itiput xit) tak&n as thecurrem and with the voltage taken as the output y(t), the input-output relationship of a
resistor is

y(0 = RxUX

(K91)

H where is the resistance. One particularly i^imple memoryless sysiem is the identity sys-
tem, whose output is identical to its input. That is, the input-output relationship for the continuous-time identity system is

v(0 = x{t\

and the corresponding relationship in discrete time is

y(rt] = x[n\ An example of a discrete-time fiystem with memory is an accumulator or summer

- Y, y[ft]

^['^]>

0.92)

and a second example i^ a delay

vfrtj - x[n- \l

93)

A capacitor is an e^tample of a continuous-time system with memory^ since if the input is
t^en to be the current and the output is the voltage, then

=m: yit) = 7^

X{T)dT.

I

(1.94)

C where is the capacitance.
Roughly speaking, the concept of memory in a system correspond!^ to the presence of a mechanism in the system that retains or stores information about input values at times

Sec. 1.6

Basic System Pnperties

45

other than the current time. For example, the delay in eq, (1-93) mpst retain or store the preceding value ol the inpuf. Similarly^ the accumulalcr in eq. (1 92) tnust "remember" of store mformation atwut past inputs. In particular, the accumulator computes the running
sum of all Inputs up to the current lime, and thus, at eiich instant of time, the accurrulator
must add the current input value to the preceding value of the running sum. In other words, the relationship between the input and output of an accumulator can be described as

orequjvalently,

>["] = >[" - 1] + x[nl

fl.9A)

Represented in the Waller way, to obtain the output at the current time n, the Licoumulator

must remeinber the runnitig sum of previous input values, which is exactJy the preceding

value of the accumulator output.

In many physical systems, memory is directly associated with the storage ot energy.

For example, the capacitor in eq. (1.94) stores energy by accumulating electrical charge,

RC represented a^ die integral of the current, Thns, the simple

i^ircuit in Example 1 .6

and Figure 1 . 1 has memory physically stored in the capacitor. Similarly, die automobile in

Figure \.2 hasTnermoiy stored in its kjnetic energy. In discrete-time systems implemented

with computers or digital microprocessors, memory is typically directly associated with

storage registers that retain va^lues between clock pulses

While the concept of memory in a system would typically suggest sii>ring fwjf input

and output values, our formal definition also leads to our referring to a system as having
memory if the current output is dependent onjitture values of the input and output. While

systems having diis dependence on future values inight at first seem unnatural, (hey in fact
form an iniip>ortant c^ass of systems, as we discuss further in Section 1.6.3.

1 ,6.2 Inveftibilfty and Inverse Systems
A m system is said to he invenihle if distinct inputs lead to distinct outputs As iUusirated
Figure 1 -45(a) for the discrete-time case£ if a system is invertible, then an inverse system
exists that, when cascaded with the original system, yields an output win] equal to the
input x[n] to the first system. Thus, the series intercotmection in Figure \ ASiA) has an overall input-output relationship which is the same as that for the identity system.
An example of an invertible continuous-time system is

yir) = 2x{lX

(1.97)

for which the inverse syjitem is

>*^(0 = ^y(0.

(1,98)

This example is illustrated in Figure 1.45(b). Another example of an invertible system is the accumulator of ec(. (1 .92). For this systenrij the difference between two successive

46
m

V."i
S/$tam

Invefsa
system

(a)

y(t) - 2x(t|

y(t)

vv{t) = fyW

(b)

Signals and SystefTi^

Chap. 1

w[nj - x|n]

w[tj=x(l)

xM ^ >{rtj

:s

k - -r^

yW

= - - w[n] y{ni] y[r> lj

w[n] = >t[nj

fc)

FJgure T.4S Conc&pt of an inverse system for: [a) a general invertibie sys-
tem, (b) the iT>vert:ibie system il^cribed by eq. (1 S^); (o) ^e invertibie system
defined in sq. ft. 92)^

m values of the output is precisely the last input value. Therefore, thi& case, the inverse
system is

w[n] ^ y[n] - y[n- 1],

(K99)

as illustrated in Figuie 1 45(c). Examples of noninveitible systems are
yM = 0,

(l 100)

that is, the system that produces the zero output sequence for any input sequence, and

yiO --- x^2'iUl

(IJOn

in which case we cannot determine the sign of the input from knowledge of the output. The concept of invertibility is important in many contexts. One eiample arises io
systems for encoding used in a wide variety of communications applications. In such a
system, a signal that we wish to transmit is first: applied as the input to a system kJ^owv^ as an encoder. There are many reasons for doing this, ranging fhjm the desire to encrypt
the original message for secure or private communication to the objective of providing sonic redundancy in the signal (for example, by adding what are known as panty bits) so that any errors that occur in transmiflsioiv can be detected and, possibly, corrected For lossless coding, the input to the encoder must be exactly recovcratile from the output; i.e., the encoder tnu^t be invertibie.

1.6,3 Causality
A system is causal if the output at any time depends only on values of the input at the
present time and in the past. Such a system is often referred to as being notutnticipative, as

Sec. 1.6

S^em Basic

Properties

47

the system output does not anticipate future values of the input Consequently, if two inputs toa cau&a] system are ideniica] up to ^ome point in time ^o t>rno, the corresponding outputs
must also be equal up to this same time. The RC circuit of Figure 1,1 is causal, since
the capacitor voltage responds only to the present and past values of the source voltage Similarly, the motion of an automobile is causal, since it doe* r\iA anticipate future actions of the driver. The systems described in eqs. (1.92) - (1.94) are also causal, but The systems defined by

yM = j[rtl -x[rt + 1]

(1.102]

iird

yd) = jf(r+ I)

0-103)

are not. All memoryless systems are causal^ since the output responds only to the current value of the iopuL
Although cau&al systems are of great importance, they do not by any means constitute the onl)' systems that are of practical significance. For example, causality is not often an es^ntia] constraint in applications in which the independent variable is not time, such as in image processing. Furthermore, in processing dfitatbat have been recorded previouslyt as often happens with speech^ geophysical, or meteorological signals, to name a few, we are bji no means cons^trained to oausaL processing. As another example, in many applications,
including historical stock market analysis and defitographic studies, we may be interested
in determining a slowly varying trend in data thaf also corttain high-frequency fluctuations
about that trend. In this case, a commonly used approadi is to average data over an interval
in order to smooth out the fluctuations an<{ keep Mily the trend. An example of a noncau^al
averaging system is

Example f .12

When checking ihe causality of a system, it is in^nrtajit to Look carefully at the inputoutput rcldtion- To illustrate some of the issues involved in doing this, wt will cbeclc the
causality of two psrticatar systems. The first system is defined by

y[^\ = x[-n\.

(1.105)

Note that the output yFnfll at a positive time jtu depends only on the value of die input
signal x[-/tis]m time (-rto), which is ncgttive ajid therefore in the past of no We may
be tempted to conclude at thi s point diat the given system is causal. However, we should
a] ways tje careful to check the input-ouqjut relation for alt times, hi paincular^ for it<Q,
cg.n = -4£weseetliatyf--4] = .r[4] , so that the output at this time depends on a fumre
value of th¨ input Keoce, the system is not -causal
It is also important to distinguish carefully the effects of the input from those of any other fitnctioas used Lnthe definidoin of the system, for example, consider the system.

yiS) = j(Ocosa+ 1>.

(I.106>

48

Signals and Systems

Chap. 1

Ln this ^ysteniH the output at any time t equals the input si that sanne Time multiplied by
a number that varies with time. Specificall>, we can rewrite eq. (1.1 06^ as

+ where g(t) is & time-var>ing funtiiuUn uamdy ^(r) = cosit 1). Thus, onlj the current
value of the input j(r) inAueuces the cunerit value of the output yi/}. and wc tunclude
that this syitem is causal (and, Ln fact* memoryles^j.
1.6.4 Stabifity
Smbility is another important system property. InformaJly^ a stable system is one in which smalL inputs lead tt> responses that do not diverge. For eKample, consider the pendulum in Figure 1.46(a), in which the input is the appJied Force x(t) and the output is the angular deviation y{t) from the vertical. In this case, gravity applies a restoring force that tends to return the penduluiri to the vertical position^ and frictional losse,'^ due to drag tend to slow it down. Consequently, if a small force xir) is appJied, the resulting deflection from vertical will also be small. In contract, for ihe inverted pendulum in Figure l.46(bX the effect of gravity is to apply a force that tends to fnt^fieajf the dtviadonfrom vertical. Thus, a small applied force leads to a large vertical deflection causing the pendulum to topple over, despite any retarding forces due to fricti&n.
The system in Figure 1 .46(a) is an example of a stable system, while that in Figure 1 .46(b) is unstable. Models for chain reactions or for population growth with unlimited food supplies and no predators are examples of unstable systems, since the system response grows without bound in response to small inputs. Another example of an unstable system is the model fora bank account balance in eq, (1.85), since if an initial deposit
IS made (i.e,£ ^[0] = a positive amount) and there are no subsequent withdrawals^ then
that deposit will grow each month without bound, because of the compounding effect of
interest payments.
/y-///////

figure i .46 (a) A stable pendulum;
(b) an unstable inverted pendulum

Sec. 1,6

Baac System Properties

49

There are also numerous examples of stjible systems. St^ility of physical systems

generally rei^ults frorn the presence of mechanlsnis that dissipate energy. For example,

RC assuming positive component vaLues in the simple

circuit of Example 1,8. the resislor

dissipates energy and this circuit is a stable system. The system in Eximple 1 9 is also

stable because of the dissipation of energy through friction.

The preceding examples provide us with an intuitive understanding of che concept

of stahihty. More formally, if the input to a stable system is bounded (i.e., if its magnitude

docs not grow without bound), then the output mnst also be bounded and therefore cannot
diverge. This is the definition of stability that we will use throughout this hook. For exam-
m ple, consider applying a constant force fit) = FXo the aucomobile Figure 1 2. with the

vehicle iniiiaUy at rest. In this case the velocity of the car will increase, but not without

bound, since the retarding frictional force also increases with veU>city. In fact, the velocity

will contmuc to increase until the frictional force exactly balances the applied force' so,
from eq. (1.84). we see that this terminal velocit)' value V must satisfy

m^V - -mF,

1L107)

i.e,

V ^ -.

108)

As

another

example,

consider

the

discrete -time

system

defined

by

cq.

104 ( 1 .

1,

and

.suppose that the input x[rt] is bounded in magnitude by some number, say. B, for all values

of n. Then the largest possible magnitude for y\_n] is also B, because y[n] is the average

of a finite set of values of the input. Therefore, }{n] is bounded and the system is .Citable.
On the yther hand, consider the accumulator described by eq. (1.92>. Unlike the system

ineq. (1.1D4), this system sums ali of the past values of the input ratherthan just a finite

set of values, and the system is unstable, since the sumcan^row continually even if j:[¨]

is bounded. For example, if the mput to the accumulator is a unit itep u[n], the output

will be

n

ft--'*
Thatis, y[0] = l,y[l] = 2, y[2] = 3, and so on, and y[rt] grows without bound,

Exampre T.T3
If we sus.pect thar a system is unstable, then a useful strategy to verify thib is to look for a specific bounded mput that leads to an unbounded output. Finding one such example
enables us to conclude diat the given system is unstable If such an example does not
exist or \s difficult to fird, we must check for stability by us^ing u method that does not
utilize specific examples of input signals. To illustrate ^is approach, let us check the st^ility of two systems.

Si:y(t)= tx{t)

109)

50

Sfgnals and Sterns

Chap. 1

and

S2: yO) - e^'K

[lAiO)

In seeking a specific touiittre?t^mplc in order to disprove^ stafcilityt *ft mighl try simple

wch buunded inputs

as A constant or a unit step. For system 5] in eq. a ( 1 .109), cctcistatit

- = inp^it xir} 1 yields y{t} r, which is unbouaded, since no matter what finite con-

We stant we pkk, !></)] will exceed that constant fbi some/.

concitxle that system ^1 is

unscable.

For system S2. which happens to be staible, we would be luii^ble to Jiiid a btninded i nput that resuLti^ ni an unbounded output. So we proceed to verify that a] L bounded inputs

result in b<iuTide4 outputs, Specifically. let B be an adntrary positive numb^, and Let lit)

be an arbitrary signal bounded hy B; that i&. we are making no assumption ^x>iit x(t).

except that

< |jr(^)|

B,

(1.1 1 IJ

or

-B <.x(0 < B,

(1.112J

for all t. Using the definitioB of 5i in eq. (l.UO>, we then see that if Mr) fi^tisfies eq. { 1 . 1 11)^ then yU) must satisfy

^-'^ <|y(Ol<e*.

(1 n3>

We conclude that if any input to 52 is bounded by an arbitrary positive number B, the
correspomiing output is guaranteed 10 be bounded by e". Thus, 5i is stable.

The system properties and coticepts that vtc have introduced so far in this section
m are of great importance, and ^ve will examine some of these in itiore detail later the
-- boot. There remain, however, two a<lditional pfroperties dme invariance and linearity--
that play a particul^ly central role in the subsequent chapters of the book, and in the remainder of this section we introduce and provide Lnidal di^u^ussionfi of these two very
important concepts.

t -6,5 Time Invctriance

Conceptually, a syst&in is time invariant if the behavior and characteristics of the system

RC are fijted over time. Ft>r example, the

circuit of Figure 1.1 is tinK invariant if the

re^stance and capacitance values R and C are constant over time: We would expeot to

get the same resuJts from an experiment with tbi^ circuit today as we would if we ran the
C identical eT^peiimeni tomorrow. On the other hantl if the values of li and are changed

or fluctuate over time, then we would expect the results of our experiment to depend on
m the tinie at which we run it. Similarly, if the frictional coefficient b and mass of the

automobile in Figure 1.2 are constantf we would expect the vehicle to respond identically

independcEidy of whan we drive it. On the other hand, if we load the auto's trujik with

heavy stiitcases one day, thus increasing m, we would eitpect the car to behave differently

than at other times when it is not so heavily loaded.

The property of time invanance can be descKbed very simply in terms of the signals

and systems language that we have introduced. Specificaliy, a system is time invariant if

.

Sec. 1 6

Basic System Properties

5T

a timt shift in tht input signal re.sulLs in an identical time shift in the output signal. That
is, if ^[n] is the output of a discrete-time^ time- in variant system when x\n] is the input,
then y[n - tta] is the output when x[n- nrj] is applied. Iti continuous *im& with v</) the
output corresponding to the input x(tX a time-invariant system will have > (/ - tt}) as ihe "outpLt when x{t - ui) is the input.
To see how to determme whether a system is time invariant or tioi, and to gain some
insight int¨ this property, consider the following examples:

Example 1.f4

Consiider the continuous-time system defined by

yCD = i*in|j(0]^

11 4j

To check that this system is time invariant, we must determine whether the time-
invariance pr:>perty holds for any input and any time shift /£. Thus, let X\U) be an urbicrary itipuE to this system^ and let

= yi(0 siti|^i(f)l

i.\.n5)

bt: the ttJiTCiponding output. Then tons-idcr bt second inpus yhLained hy shifting j (/) in ,
tune;

-^./ = xiit -ttt).

U-116)

The ou[put corresponding to thii^ input js

= = y>(f)

sin[.if::(?j!

Mn[A,(/ - to)].

<M17>

Similarly, from eq. (1 . 1 I5i,

y^it-t^,)

=

- '^m\ x ^

{t

in}\

(I IIS^

Comparing eqsi. (1.117) and (l.llEj, we see that y2(0 = - h'( (f fo^ a^d. therefore, diis
system is time invanant.

Example t .1$

As a second example, consider the distrete-time system
y[n] = Kx[nl

(1.119)

Thisisatime-varyingsystem, afact thalcan be vcritJcd using the same formal prootdure

as that used in the preceding example (sec Problem 1-2S), However, when a system is

suspected oi bdng [ime vtuying, an uppruach to showing this thut is i^flen very uM^ful
-- is to seek a counterexample i,e., to use our intuition to find an input signal for which

the condition of time invariance is violated. In panicular, the system in this eKaniple
represents a system with a time-varying gain. For example, if we know (hat the cunenl

input value is 1 , wÈ cannot determine the aiuent output value without knowing the

current titne.

= Consequently^ CQiisider the itiput signal x\[n'\

&\fi\> which yields an output

yi [n] that is identically (since nSffi] = 0>. However^ the input j^ [n] = Sin -1] yields

= the output y 2 frt]

-- itS[tt \} = Sin-- ll_ Thus, while j;i[fl] isashifted version of jcdrtl.

yi [n] in mii a shifted version of yi [n]

S2

Signals and Systems

Chap 1

While the Aystem in the preceding fijtample has a time-vaiying gain and as a result is a time -varying system, the system in eq, (1 ,97) has a constant gain a¨d, in fact, is time in vari ant . Other exampJes of time-i nvariant systems are gi ven by eqs. ( 1 .9 1 )--( 1 . 1 04), The following example illustrates a time-varying system.

Example I.T6

Consider the system

= vtr)

Jt(20-

(1.12U>

T^i> sy^lenn rtprescnts a time scciling. That ii, >(;) is a timt-tompressied (by s factor of

2) vtf.'iLon of j:(f). Intuitively, then, any tJme shift in the iriput i^ill also be compressed

by a [ii<^iof vt 2. and it i^ far this rcasttn that the system is not time invarisitit. To Jemon-

i>triAte Ihis by iounterexample, consider the input JCiit) shown in Fi^^urt 3 47(a) and the

m -- nesultinjj output yiO) depicted

Figure 1.47(b) If vve then shift the laput by 2

le ,

-- cynsidej x^U) ~ ^\{f ' 2>.a.') shown in Figure I.47-fc> we obtain the rtsulting output

>t.(t)

yi(i)

2

2

t

(a)

¨2ft) - x,[t-3|

1

1

(bl

Ë2(tt

c

4t

(cl

yi(t-2}

<e)

Figure j.47 (a) The input j^^fO to the system id FxampJe 1 '6; (b) the

output /t(0 corresponding to x,{t)- (c) the shjfted fnput ;^{t) = v^^f - Z);

(d) the output y2it] corresponding to jfe(0; (b) the stiifted sigral yi(r - 2)

^ Note that yi.{ri

/i (f - 2)^ showing that Ihe system is not lime invarlanr

Sec 1 .6

Basic System Properties

S3

>*(r> = X2i2^'i shown in figure 1.47(d). Comptaiing Figures 1 47(d) and(e), wt see that >'=(0 5^ >iO - 2). sc that the system is tioi time invariani. (In fact, viCO = 3'i(f - 0. so
that the output time shift is only half as big as il should be fttf time in vari^ncs^, due to the time compression imparted by The system.)

1.6.6 Lpnearity
A Uneaf system, in c^intinuouFi time or discrete timSi is a system that possesses the impor-
tant property of superposition: If an input consists of the weighted sum of several signals,
-- -- then the output is the superposition that is, the weighted sum of the responses of the
system to each of those sign^l^. More precisely, let >'|(0 be the response of a continuous
hme system to an inpuc xi{t% and let y2{t) be the output corresponding to the input ^^(OThen the s>stem is linear if:

1. The response to x^it} + xjit) iiy\(t) + ytit).
1. The response Lo axy(t) i$ ayi(t), vi^here a is any complex constant.

T^e first of these two properties is known as the additivity property; the second is knoivn us the scaling ^t homogeneity property. Although we have written this description using continuous-time signals, the same definition holds in discrete time. The systems specified by eqs. (1.91H1 100), (1,102)-(1.104X and (1,119) are linear, while those defined by
eqs. (1.101) and (1.114) are nonlinear. Note that a system can be linear without being time invariant, as in eq, (1.119), and it can be time invariant without being Imcar, as in eqs. (l.lt)l) and (1.114).
The two properties defining a linear system can be combined into a single statement

continuous time: ax\{l^ + bx^it} -^ ay\{t) + by^ii). discrete time: a.Ti[n] + &J2["] --^i^yd'^^ + by2\.n\.

(1.121) (1.122)

Here, a and b are any complex constants. Furthermore, it is straightforward to show from

= the definition of linearity that if rVÈ[n], k

L 2, 3

are a set of inputs to a discrete-

= time linear system with correspending outputs yt["]i it 1, 2, 3, . .+ then the response to

a linear combination of these inputs given by

x[n\ = ^^a(,x^[n] = a^x^Yn] + fl^^atn] + a3^3[¨] +
k

(11 23)

is

yW = ^Otydn] = ti\y][n] + a2y2[n\ + a^_nln] + ....
k

(1.124)

This very important fact is known as the superposition property^ which holds for linear
systems in both continuous and discrete time.
A dinsct consequence of the superposition property is that, for linear systems, an
input which is zero for all time results in an output which is zero for all time. For example, if -*["]--£>[¨], then the homogeneity property tells us that

= 0- x[n] -*

= ' y[n\

0.

(1.125)

54

Signals and Systens

Chap. 1

Til the following eiiamples we illustrate how the linearity of a given systen^ can be
checked by directly applying the dfifiniiion of linearity.
Example 1.17
Cdiasidera system S whose input x(j) aitd output y{i) are related b^
v(0 = txit) To detenu ine whether or not 5 is linear, we consider two arbitrary inputs j|(/j and x:(/).

xiiF) -* yiU) = txi(t)

Let

jr 1 (/ )

be

a

linear eombination

of x (i) [

and

j^-O).

That

i s,

where a and h are arbitrary scalar^. If Jti(f) is the input to S. then the crorres ponding
output may be Cvipro^sed .as

- + flyi(0 ft£y2(0 We conclude that the system S is linear.
Example 1.18
Let us apply the linearity-checking procedare of tha previous tJiample l¨ another system
S whose input x{t) and output yit) j^re related by

Defining Jt\it\ xzit)^ and x^{t) as in the pievlous example, we have
^ xUj) yAO = x^m
X2V) -^ yiH) = xlir)
and
^3(0 -^ y\<.n = A(o

- o^x]iT) + b^xjU) + 2abxiUU2.(i) = (i^y^U)-^b'^MO + 2abx,iTU2{t)

aearly^ we can specify X[(i)^X20}. a, ajidt^ucli that >'3ir)isnot the same asa>i(r) +

Ca = ^ *fy2(f) Forexample.ifj;](/) l>Jf;<r)

= 2.and^ = O.thenji(0 = (2jtj(0)^ =

We 4,hut2yi(0 = 2{x\{i)f = 3.

ctindude that the system 5 is not linear.

Example 1.19

In checking the linearity of a system, it is important to remember that the system must satisfy both the addjtivjty and homugetieity properties and that the signals, as well as any Kahng constants, ate allowed to be coioplex. To emphasize the impomnce of these

Sec. 16

Basic Si'Stem Properties

SS

points, ton^idei die syslcm specified by

y[n] ^<k^{x[n]}.

tl-126)

As shnwn in PR>blem 1.29, this system h addiiive- however, it does not satisfy the homogeneity property^ as we now demonstrate. Let

x[n\ = r[n\ + Js[n\

(M37)

btan artiitrairy tomple?: inpyt with real and imaginary part^ r[n] anJ sin], respectively,
so that the corresponding output is

- vi[rtl

r[n].

(1,128)

Now, consider sculing x\ \n] by a complex number, for example, a ^ J, i,e , Consider
the input

= + -s[n] jr[tt].
The outpur correspoDding to X2\fi] is

whtch is not equal to the scalfd version of >ifn],

aythJ - jr\nl

(1.131)

We conclude that the ^ysteon violates the homogeneity property and hence is not linear.

Example t.20

Consider the system

y[nl = 2x[n]-^ \

(L.132)

This system is not hnear, as can be verified in several ways. For exampSen the system

X violates

the

additivity

property ^

Tf

Xi[ri]

=

2 and xzlfi]

=

then

Xi[rt1^ yi(nj = lK^[n\-b2 = 7, i2[n]^ y:[nj = 2x2[n} + 2 - 9.

= However, the response to jf J Ifl]

x\ln] + jr^fiJis

y3[nl = 2Ui[i] + X2[n]] + 3 = 13,

n.l35) il.n4\
(1.135)

+ vvhich does not equal yil/i] >'2[£tJ = 16. Alternatively, since yUl = 3ifxfn] = Ot wc
see that the system violates the "itcno-iii/zero-out** property of linear systems given in
eq. (L125).
m jt may seem ÈurpriÈjng that the system the above example is n^ttlincai, sirice
eq. <M32) is a linear equatioiu On the other hand, as depicted in Figure 1 A^^ the output
of thi^ systtm caa be repriesented as the ÈUjnof the output of a Unearsystem and another
signed equal to the zero-mpul response of the system. Fnr the system in eq. (1 . 1 32), the hnear system 1^

and the zero-mput lespunse is

56

Signals and Systems

Chap 1

Uriear
x(tf

-*-m

Ffgure i.4fl Structure cA an Incrementally llrtear system. Here, >t[n) is the zero-input response of the system.

There lire, in factjarge classes of systems in both continuous and discrete time ihat
-- cart be reprt'^cntcd as in Pijjure l-4ii i.e.. foj which the overall system i>atpyt consisi-i
ftf (he superpdsition of the response of a linear ivstem with a zero-input response As "^hown in I*ro;^lem 1.47, sach systems correspond to the cl^ss of imnmentclly linfar
-- jyy:stÈmA i.e.. systems in tontmuuus or discrete time that reiip^md line^rlv to ciian^e^ in
the input- In tnther v^ords^ rhe difference between the responses tn any two inputs |(i an incrementally Linear system is a linear I'l e., aJditrve and homogeneous) functi[.>n of the difference b£etween the twc inputs. For example, if Ji [n\ and j;t["J are two inputs to the system specified by eq. (I.l[i2>, aiid if vi InJ and >;[piJ lire the toiresponding outputs^
then

>-,r¨l

- v.jnl

=

+ 2;ci[flJ

:?

- {2x2[n] + ^}

=

2\x,\ft\-

r>frtj'

U.136)

1.7 SUMMARY

In this chapter, we have developed a number of basic concepbi related to continuous-tiTne

We anddiscrete'titne signals and systems.

have pres&nted both an intuitive picture of what

signals and systems ar^ through several examples and a mathematical representation for signals and systems that we will use throughout the book. Specifically, we introduced

graphical and mathematical representations of signals and used these representations in

We performing transformations of the independent variable.

aiso defined and exainiiied

several basic signals, both in continuous time and in discrete time. These included cotn-

plex exponential sigtials, sinusoidal signals, and unit impulse and step functions. In ad
dition, we investigated the concept of periodicity for continuous-time and dificrete-time

signals.

In develtjping sotne of die ekmentary ideas related to systems, we introduced bl(>ck

diagrams to facilitate our discussions concerning the interconnection of systems, and we

defined a number of important prnperties of systems, including causality, stability, time

invariance, and linearity.

The primary ft>cus in most of this book will be on the class of linear, time- in variant

(LTI) systems, both in continuotis time and in discrete time. These systems play a par-

ticularly important role in system analysis and design, in part due to the fact that many

systems encotititered in nature can be successfully modeled as linear and time invariant, Furthernnore, as we shall see in the following chapters, the properties of Imeanty and Lime

invariance allow us to analy7e in detail the behavior of LTI systems.

.

Chap. 1 Problems

57

Chapter 1 Problems

Rasic problems cmpha^jj^e the niechamc^ of using concepts and methods in a man-
ner RimiUr to thai illustrated in the examples that are solved in the test
Advanced problems explore and elaborate upon thefoundatums andpr^ctjcal im-
pJicalifins of the textual material. The first iecliun of problems belongs to the basic category^ and the ansu'crs are pro-
vided in the back of the book. The next two sections contain problems belonging to the
A hn-sio and advant:ed categories, resr>?t:tively. final sectior^ Malhem^itlcai Review, pro-
vides practice problems on the fundamcnLai ideas of t:ornplex arithmetic and algebra.
BASIC PROBLEMS WITH ANSWERS

K\press each of th^ foliowing cojnplex numbers in Carteiiian fom^ (v -I- jy) ^r-f^ ^e ^^, i'f^''^,e ^^^', e^^^i^, ^fle-f"-^, v2^^^'^^^ J2^~^'^'^^\ Jic'^'-y

1.2. Express each of the following complex numbers in polar form ^re'^ with TT <

-J\A e ^-- 7r):_5. -2. -3 J. k

+ jA^-J)\ 10 -Jl (1 +;V(1

1.3. Determine the values tif P. and ft-, for each of the following signuls:

(a) x\U) = e ^'ii(0

= (b) JC2(T)

f>Jf-f+'^^^'

(c) x^in = cQs(r)

(d> ^|[^] = (-^rH[ft\

(e) xAn] =r e'(^^^"^"/s)

^^ ^^[^1 ^ cos(Jn)

lA = < > Let x[n] he a signal with x\n]

for n

-2 and n 4. For each signal given

below, determine the values of h for which it is guaratitecd to be zero.

(a) x\n -3\

<b) *ln-F41

(c) x[-rj]

(d) x[-n -\-2]

(e) x[-n-2\

< 1.5, Let x(f) be a signal with x{t) - for f 3. For each signal giveti below, determine

the values of t for which it is guaranteed io be ?ero.

(a) ^(1 -

(b) x{} - 4^ x(2 - t)

(CI x{\ " t)x{l - t)

(d) x{l,0

(e> ;f(f/3)

Detertninc whether or not each of the following signals is periodJcr

= (a) x\{t) 2ef'''^'^'uil)

= (b) x^in] u\n] -s- u[-n]

ic) x^n] - Xl=. AS{n - 4k] - S[n - l - 4k]]

For each signal giveti below, determine all the values of the independent variable ai

which the even part of the signal is guaranteed to be zero.
(a) X][Tt] = u[n]-u[rj-4] (b) XilO = sm<^0

(c) x^\Fi] = {^ru[n - ?]

= (d) x^iO

tf-^'u(i 4- 2)

Express the real part of each of th e fol lowi ng signals in the form A^ " ^' co s((u t + t^),

A > < ^ where A, a, <i}, and 4> are real nimibers with

and -tt (^

ir:

(a) xy{t) = -2

+ {h) X2(t) = j2eJ'^''*cosOt 2'n^)

(c) x:^{0 = ^-*sin(3/-F tt)

(d) x^r) = jV-2-^;ioov

1.9* Deteimine whether or not each of the following signals is periodic. If a signal is

periodic, specify its fundamental period.

(a) ;t|U) = je^^^'

- (d) .V4l¨l

3^j37i(flH- 1/21/5

^ ^<-l+jV

(c) xiln] = e^^'

58

Signals and Systems

Chjip, 1

1.10, Determine the fundamentaJ period of the signal jc(f) = 2cos(10/+ 1>- sm(4r - 1). = 1.11, Detemuue the fimdameiitaJ period of the si^ial x[n] + 1 gj^-^"^ - ef^^"f^,
1.12, Consider the discrete-time signal
no
t[/i] ^ 1 -5]e[n-l- Jt).

W Determine the values of the integers atid no so that x\n\ may be expressed as

- x{ri\ - i(\Mt\

nssV

1.13, Consider the coTitinuouS'time signal

xiO = S(t + 2)~ait-2X

Calculate the value of E<^ for the signal

1.14, Consider a periodic signal
^^ [-2, ]<t<2
= with period T 2. The derivative of this signal is related to the '^impulse train"

with period T = 2. It can be shown that

= Aigit-tt) + A2gU-t2l
-jf-

Determine xhe values of A|, ^i, A2, and r?.
1.15, Considers system 5 with input x[n] and output y[fl]. This system is obtained thrwugh a scries interconnection of a system Si foUowed by a system S2. The input-output
relationships for S| and 5? are

Sy :

ydfi] - 2xi[n] + 4xdn - l],

where Xi[n\ and X2\n] denote inppt signals, (a) Determine the input-output relationship for system 5. <b) Does the input-output relationship of system S change if the order in which Si
and 53 are connected in series is reversed (i.e., if 5^ follows S\)l
1,1*. Consider a discrete-time system with input x[n\ and output y{n\. The mput-output
relationship for this system is
Mrt] - xin\x[n - 2].

Chap, 1 Problems

59

(a) fs the system memoty less?
(b) DetemiiRe the output of the system when the input is A6[¨l, where A is any
real or complex iLutnber (c) Is the system Jnvertible?
1*17. Consider a conEinuous-tirae system with input xit) and autput y{t} related by

(a) Is this system causal? (h) Is this system imear? 1 J8. Consider a discrete-time system with input x[n] and output y[rtl related by

where no is a finite positive integer (a.) Is this system linear?

(a) Is this system time-invariant?

< B (c) If Jflnl is known to be bounded by a finite integer^(i.e,J;c[n]|

for all n), it

C can be shown that y[n] is beurided by a finite number We conclude that the

C given system is stable. Express in terms of B and rt^^

1£19,
1,2(1,

For each of the following input-output relationships, determine whether the corre-

sponding system is Imear, time invariant or both.

= (a) y(t}

- t'^xii

1)

- = + - (c) y\n\

j:[n

1]

jf[,,

1]

(b) y\n\ - ^[?^ - 2}

= (j) jr[;,]

Od{x{t}}

A ¨>ntinuouE-time linear system S with input xij) and output >(r) yields the follow-

ing input-output pairs:

40 = e^^'^ y(t) ^ e^^\

(aj Tf X)[t) = cos(2f), determine the corre^wnding output yriO for system S, (b) If x-2(t) = cos(2(r - |£, determine the coiresponding output y2ii) for sys-
tetn S,

BASIC PROBLEMS

A 1.2h continuous-dme signal x{t} is shown in Rgure PI. 21. Sketch and label carefully

each of the followiog signals:

1.22,

(a) xit-])

(b) ^(2 -

+ (<;> x(2t 1)

(d) x{A - 1)

<e> [x(t) + x(-r)\uu)

- - (f) x(t)[d(t + ^)

&ii

Ï)]

A discreie-titiie signal is shown in Figure P 1 ,22, Sketch and label carefully each of

the following sa^al^.

(a> x[n - 4]
id) jc[3¨ + 11
(E> ^^H + ^i-l)"xM

<b) 43 - n]
- (e) jcfrtlu[3 n]
(hj x[(n - 3)^]

(c) x[3n]
- (f) x[n - 2]S\ti 2]

60

Signals and Systems

Chap. 1

2

t

Figure P1.2f

1
-^ -3-2-1012J34_5^^n
4
-1
Figure PI ,22

1.23* Eteterminc andiketch the even and odd parts of the si gna's^ depicted in Figure Pl-23 Label your sketches carefuUv.

y-m
vx

1

2

(a)

xCt]

2 -1
(tJ)

The 4ine -1

TTie line
> - x(t) t fort
1

Figure P) .23

1,24* Determine and sketch the even and odd parts of the signals depicted ir FigLirePl.24 Label your sketches carefully.

Ctiap. 1 Problems

fri

-1
12 3
-1

-*-*--ñ-

I

-2

2*

im -4

i:

a

Figure Pi .24

1^5* Detertnine whether orno[ each of the following continuous-time signals is periodic

If the signal is pericdic+ determine its fund^niental period.

(a) x{t) = 3cos(4^ + f)

= (b) x{{)

e^^'^'-^'^

(C) x{t) = [cos(2f - f )]^

id) x(t} = ei^cos(47r/)ii(0}

(c) x{t} = Èt^sin(4iTf)H(0}

1.26, Determine whether or not each of the following discrete-time signals is periodic If

the signal is periodic, determine its* fundamental period-

(a) x[n] = sin(^n+ 1)

= ll>) x[n]

cos(| - ttI

<c) ^[n] = cos(fn-i

<d) x[rt] = cos<f/i)cos(^n)

(e) x[n] = 2cosCjn) -£-sin(|¨> - IciKi^ri + f 1

1.27* In this chapter, we introduced a number of general propertiefi of systems. In partic-

ular, a system may or may not be (1) Memoryleis

(2) Time invariant

(3) Linear

(4) Causal

(5) Stable

XJetermine which of these propeities hold and which do nyt hold for eat:h of die

following oontinuous-time systems. Justify your answers. In each example. yU^ de-

notes the system output and xU) is the system input.

^2
- - (a) y(t) x{t 2) + x(2 - t)

Signals and Systems

Cfiap. 1

(b) y{f\ ^ [QO^M)\xit]

Wil 11

1.28, Determine which of the properties lisited in ProbJem 1.27 hold and which do not

bold for each of the following discrete-time systems. Justify your answers^ In each

example, >[^J denotes the system output and x[n] is the system input.

(a) yfrt] = Jf[-w]

<b) y[fi] = x[n - 2] -2x[n - 8]

(C) yinl = nxln]

yM (d)

= SHxln - 1)}

r jcln],

n^ \

^ r x[jil n

1

te) y\n] =io,

n = {T} y[n] ^io,

n= Q

[x[Tt+ Ij, n ^ -I

n^ [x[n\,

-I

(E> y[n] = x[4n+l]

1.29. iai) Show th^ the discrete-time system whose input x{n] and output y[n] are related by y[n] = (R^rrn]} is additive. Does this system remain additive if its input-
= output relationship is changed to y[n] (R*(t''''*^^i[it]}? (Do not assuitie that
x[n] is real in this problem*)
(b) In the text, we discussed the fact that the property of linearity for a system is equivalent to the system possessing both the addirivity property and homogene-
ity property. Determine whether each of the systems defined below is additive and/or homogeneous. Justify your answers by providing a proof for each profh erty if it holds or a counterexample jf it does notn

130, Determine if each of the JbDowing systems is invertible. If it is, construct die inverse

system. If it is not, find two input signals lo the system thai have the same output.

= <at) y(0

x(t - 4)

(b) yU) = cosIjf(f)]

(C> y[n] = nx[n\

<d) y{t) = J^^x(TWr

i x[n- 1],

= (e> y[rt]

^ 0.

^ n

\

n=

(f) >[n] ^ x\n]x[n - 1]

= <&> y[n]

- -^[1

n]

(t) >h] - X'L-Jlr-'x[k]

^ (b) y(0 = j '^ ^-^^-^^ j(t)Jt
^ (i) y(t)

(m) y[n\ = x[2n]

(n)

y[n]

^

^^"^^'
|

[ 0,

''^^^"
nodd

IJl* In this problem, we illustrate one of the most important consequences of the properties of linearity and time invariaiw;e. SpecifiKilly, once we know the response of a linear system or a linear time-invariant (LTl) system to a single input or the responses to several inputs, we cari direciiy cotnpute the responses to many other

.

Chap. 1 Prob^ems

6J

input sigEi^s. Much of the tetnainder of this book deals with a thorough exploitation

of thas fact in order to develop results and techniques for anal yiing and synthesizing

LTT sy sterns.

(a) Consider an LTl .system whose response id the signal i^ (r) in Figure PI 31 (a) is

^tch the signal y\{t) illustrated in Figure PI.3 1(b). Determine and

carefully

the response of the system to the input Jt2(0 depicted in Figure PI, 31(c).

(b) Detennine and sketch the response of the system cons]der<£i in part ta) to the

input JTjfO shown in Figure ?1.3l(d).

*t|{t)

^iCt)

K

1

2

a

1

2

(a)

-2W

¨:j(l)

-1

J 2 3

(ct

n[h -10 12
(tfl

ADVANCED PROBLEMS

132. Let xiO be a continuous-time signali and let

Figure Pf.31

The signal y\{t) represents n speeded up version of x(f) in the sense thut the duration of the signaJ is cut in half. Similarly, yzit) represents a slowed down version of
x{t) in the sense that the duration of the signal is doubled. Consider the following statements:
(1) If xit) 15 periodic, then yt {t} is periodic. (2) If yi{t) is periodic, then x{t) is periodic (3) If xit) is periodic, then y2iO is periodic. ('^) If yiif) is periodic, then x{t) is periodic. For each of these statements, determine whether it is true, and if so^ determine the
relationship between the fundamental periods of the two signals considered in the statement. If the statement is not true, produce a counterexample to it.
1.33. Let x[n] be a discrete-time signal, and let

^'[nl ^ Jfl2n| andy2lnl =
0.

neven n odd

)

64

Signals and S^tams

C^ap. 1

The signals yt [h\ and y2{ft] respectiveJy represent in some sense the speeded up and slowed dij^n versions of x{n\. However, it should be noted that the discrete- ame notions of speeded up and slowed down hav^ subtle differences \vith respei^l to thcii
continuous-titne cDunterpartSn Consider the following statements:
n ( 1 If x[n] is periodic, then y^ [ti] periodic.
(2) If J] [n] i* periodic, then Jc\n\ is periodic. (3) If jc[nl is periodic, then ji^t"] ^s periovlic. (4) If 3'z(j^? is periodic, then x[rt] is periodic.
For tach of these statements, determine whether it is true, and if so, determine the relationship between the fundamental periods of the two signsJs considered in the siaiemci^v. If th& ^taieTTienl is not tnae, produce a counterexample to it
1.34. In thiii pn>blem, we explore several of the properties of even and odd signals. (a) Show that if x[n} is ^n odd signal, then

(b) Show that if JC] [n] is an odd Signal and X2[n] is an eveti signal, then jt] [^Jrtatnj
is an odd signal. (c) Let x[nl be an arbitrary signal, with even and odd parts denoted by

and
Show that

x^n] = eduwy
1-^

(d> Aldiougb paits (aHc) have been stated in terms of (tscretc-time signals, the
analogous properties are also valid in continuous tirne. To demonstrate this, show that

^M where

and jCoU) are, respectively, the even and odd pans of xUX

1,55, Consider the periodic discrete-time exponential time signal

Show that the fundamental period of this signal i$

N^= iV/gcd<m,jVX

m N-- where gcd(m, iV> is the greater common divisor of and

that is. the largest

N m integer that divides both and an integral number of times. For example,

gcd(2,3> = l,gcda4) = 2,gcd(S,l2) - 4,

Note thut JV[] =^ Niftn and iV have no factors in common.

criap. 1 Prowems

*5

1.56, Let xit) he the continuDus-time complex ej^ponential signal

= with fundamental frequency lijo and fundamental peritxl To I'rr/todr Consider the
-- discrete-time signal obtained by taking equally spaced samples of x{0 that h,
= x[n] = x(rtT) e^'^'^K
-- (a) Show that j[|n] is periodic if and only if TfTn is a rational number that is. if
and only if some multiple of the ^amipling interval exactly equals a multiple of
the period of jc(r).
-- (b) Suppose that x[n\ is periodic that ist that

1^ --.

(PI. 3^1)

where p and g are integers. What are the fiirulamemal period and fundamental frequency of x[n]? Express the fundamental frequency as a fraction of wnT.
(c) Again assuming that T/T^) satisfies eq, (PI .36-1), determine precisely ho^v
many periods of jt(f) are aeed^sd to obtain the sampleit that form a ^mgle penod
of j:[rtj,
1.37. An important concept in many cofrrniunications applications is the correlation be-
tween two signds. In the problems at the end of Chapter 2£ we wiH have more to say about this topic and will provide seme indication of how it is used in practice. For now, we content ourselves with a brief introduc don to corrtlatior functions and some of their properties.
Let xit) and y{t) be two signals; then the correlation function is defined as

The function ^jx(0 is usually referred to as the autocorrelaiionfunction of the signal
x{t), while ^^j (r) is often called a cross-correlation function.
<a) What is the relationship between ^;^v(r) and iftyiit)"} (b) Compute the odd part of ^^^^(O.
+ (c) Suppose that y(t) - x(_t T). Express <^jy(r) and <^vv(/) in terms of (i>xT{t).
1-38. In this problem, we examine a few of the properties of the unit impulse function. (a) Show that
6(2f) - ^Sit).
Hint: Examine 5i(r), (See Figure 1 34.) (b) In Section \A, we defined the continuoas-time unit impnlse as the limit of the
signal 5a(j). More precisely, we defined several of the properties of &(t) by
examining the corresponding properties of ^^tf). For example, since the signal
¨a(0 = f S^(7)dT

66

Signals and Systems

Chap. 1

converges to the unit sttp

Mi) =

we could interprei d(r) through the equation

(p^.ia^i)

or by viewing S{t) as the formal derivative of M(f).
This type ot discussion is important, us we are in effect trying to define S{t) through^its properties rather than by specifying its value for each (, which is not possible, in Chapter 2, we provide a very simple chartictefization of the
behavior of the unit impulse that is ejttremely useful in the study cf linear tiine-
invariant systems. For the present, however, we conc&ntrate on demonstrating thai the itnportartt concepi in using the unit impulse is Vd ui^dcrstand how it behaves. To do this, consider the sis signals depicted in Figure P1_3R Sho^
A\^

27
(a)
^'m

^ iSA
(b)

rtffl

m

-i

A

r^,lt)=-i^-^l^-^

-\
V\
(ej

(f)

Figure Pi .38

Chap. 1 Problems

^7

that each 1>ehaves like an impulse" as A --*

we in thai, if

let

then

lim uUt) - u{t).

In each case, sketch and label carefully the signal wj^C/), Note chat
4(0) = 4(0) = for all A.

Th^icfore. it is not enough to define or to think cf Sit) as being zero for / t^
= and infinite for / 0, Rather, it is properties snch as eq. (PL38-1) that define the impulse. In Section 2.5 we will define a whole class of signals known as
sing\iiarit\ functions, which art related to the unit impulse and which are also
defined in terms of th&ir properties rather than their values,
1.39, The role played by u{t\ Sit), and other singularity functions in die study of linear time-invariant systems is that of an idealization of a physical phenomenon, and* as we will see, the use of these idealizations aJlow us to obtain an exceedingly important and very simple representation of such systems. In using singuliirity functions*
we need, however, to be careflil , In panicular, we must remember that they are ideali;Kation&^ ^uid thus, whenever we perform a caJcuIation using dtem, we are implicttZy
assuming that ihis calculation represents an accurate description of the behavior of the signals that they are intended to i^ali^. To illustrate, consider the equ^tLon

x{t)Sm - xm&itl

(P139-1)

TTiis ei^uation Js based on ihe observation that
- Mt)S^it) xim&i^ij).

(Pl.39^2)

Taking the limit of this; relatitxiship then yields the ideahzed one given by eq,

(PI. 39-1), However, a more careflil examination of our derivation of eq. (PI. 39-2)

^hows that that equation really makes sense only if x{t) is continuous at r =^ D. If it
^ is not, then we will not have x{i) x{(y) for r small.

To make this point clearer, consider the unit step signal uij). Recall from eq,

< -- > (1 .70) that h(0 = for r

and u(j)

= 1 for i' 0, but that its value at /

is

not defined. [Note, for example, that wi(0) ^ for all A, while ^^(0) ^ ^ (from

Problem 1 .33<b)>.] The fact that u(l) is nol defined is not particularly bethersome,

as \on^ as the t;akruJatiojis we perform using uii}do not rely cm a specific choice for

u(0). For example, if fit) is a signal thai is continuous at ^ = 0, then the value of

f{t7)vitT}d(T

does nol depend upon a choice for wft})^ On the other hand, the fact that wiO) is
undefined is signi^cant in that it means that certain calculations involving sin^ular-
it)i functions are undefined. Consi dor trying to define a ^alue for the product uit)S{t).

63

SignaJfi ar>d Systems

Chap. 1

To ^ee that this cann<^t be defined, show that Iim[ui(05(i)] - 0, A--^0
but

lim^f¨Ai:05i(r)J = ^^S(tl

In general, we can define the product of [wo signals without any difficulty,
as long as the signals do not contain singtiiarities (discontinuities, impulses, or the
other singularities introduced la Section 2.5) whose locations coincide. When the
locations do coincide, tiiepn>duct is nndefiaed. As an example, show that the signal

git) = j uijmf - T>dr

is identical to uit), that is, it is

= for t

[}.

< > for : 0> it equals 1 for r 0, find it is ui^defined

1,40,

(a) Show that if a system is ^irh^r additive or homogeneous, \t has Uie properly
that if the input is identically itero, then the output is also identically zero. (b) Determine a system (either in continiions or discrete time) that is neither ad-
ditive nor homogeneous but which has a zero output if the input is identically

(c) From part (a), can you conclude that if the input to a linear system i.s zero be-

^d tween times ^]

f2in continiious tinK or between dmes n\ and nj in discrete

time, then its output tiiust also be ^ero between these same times? Explain your

answer.

1*41, Consider a systent S with inpiit 7i{n] and output y{n\ related by

y[n\ = x[n]{gM + g[n - TJ}.

1^2.

= (a) If g[n]

1 for all n^ show that 5^ is time invariant.

(b) If g[n] = fl, show that $ is not dme invarianL.

(e)

If g[n]

--

I

-I-

(--

)",
1

show

that

5

is

time

invariant.

(a) Is the following statement true or false?

The series interconnecdon of two linear time-invariant systems is itself a lineM,
time-invariant system.

Justify your answer, (b) Is the following statement trae or false?

Tlie series Jtitercoiinectioii of two nonlinear systems is itself nonlinear.

Justi^ your answer. (c> Consider three system'; with the following input-output r&lation ships:

System 1:

M¨]

=

^^'^^'
| y,

"rt'o"d'df .

Chap. \ Problems

69

System 2:

- yin]

x{n] + "A[rt - 1] + - -^^[rt 2],

Syscctn 3:

yln] = xi2n]r

m Suppose that the^e systems sire connected in series as depicted Figure PI.42,
Find the input-output relationship for the overall intercomiectecJ system, fs this Hysteiti linear? Is it time invariant?

System 1

System È

System 3

Vln]
Figure PI, 42

1.43, 1.44.

(a) Cortsidet a dtne-in variant system with input x(t) and ou^ut y{(). Show that if
h xif) peiiodic with period T, then so is y{ri Show that the analogous result
also holds in discrete time, (b) Give an example of atime-invari:intsystemandarionpejnodioinput signal j(/)
such that ihe corresponding output yii) is periodic.
(a) Show that causality for a continQous-time linear system is equivaJent to the
following statement:

^ For aj^y time to and any input jf(;> such that .t(/) < LDg output >'(0 cnust also be zero foe t t^.

< for f To, the correspond-

Thfi ana){7gfjus statement can be made for a discrete-time Jinear system
(b) Find a tioolinear system that satisfies the foregoing condition but is not causal. (c) FinJ '4 nonlinear system that is causal but does not satisfy the condition.
(d) Show thai inveitihility for a discrete-time linear systetn is equivalent to the
following statement:

The only input that produces y[n] ^ for all n is x[n] = for all ra.

The analj^gous stateinent i.'; also true fof a continuous-time linear system. (e) Find a nonlinear system that satisfies the condition of pan (d> but is not invert-
ible.

1-45.

U In F*roblem 1 .37, we introduced the concept of correlation functions. is often im-
portant in praiLlice to conipute the correlation ftinctitin 4*hAt}. where h{t) is a fixed
given signal^ but where x{t) may be any of a wide variety of signals. In this case, what is done is to design a system S with input x{t) and output <t>hx(^)(£> Is i5 linear? Is 5 time invariant? Is 5 causal? Explain your answers. (h> Do any of your answers to part (a) change if we tate as the output (f>^hiO rather
than ^tAD'^

1A6, Consider the feedback system of Figure PL46. Assiime that y[n\ = OU>i n <0.

xln]

O e[n]

- y[n]

etrt - 11

*- vln]

Figure Pr.46

70

Signifs and Systems

Chap, 1

(a) Sketch the output when xfflj = S[n]. {b) Sketch the output when x[n\ = w[/t].

147.

(a) Let S denote an incrementally linear system, and let x^ [n] be da arbitrary input

signal to S with corresponding output yjln]. Consider the system illustrated in

^t Figure P1.4-7(a). Show

h this system linear and that, in fact, the overall

input-output relationship between x[n] and y[n] does itot depend on the partic-

ular choice of T| [n).

(b) Use the result of part (a) to show that 5 can be represented in the form shown

in Figure 1.45^

(c) Which of the following systems are iiicfeincntally linear? Justify your answers,

and if a system, is incrementally Unear, identify the linear system L and the jtero

ijiput respoitse yo[n] or yo(T} for the lepresentation of the system as shown in

Figure L48.

^ (i) ylfi]

n + xift] + 2x[n + 4]

n/2,

n even

<ii) y[n] -

*- y[nl

¨["]

*- yw

(b)

cos (im)

z(nl

r-

hl=v=[n]

w[n] II > w(n] = K=rrI

*-y(n]

(C)
Figure Pr47

Chap. 1 Problerrts

71

^0 = (iii) ^^[^1

x[n]- \[n- 1]+ 3.
j:lrtl-4n- ^]-%

if;c|0]
H AO] <0

(iv) Th& system depicted in Figure PI .47(b).

(v) The system depicted in Figure PI .47(c).

(d) Suppose that a particular incrementally iitiear system lus a representation as
in Figure 1 .45, with L denoting the linear system and yo[Ml the zero-input reL sponse. Show that S is time invariant if and only if is a time-invariant system

and yo[n] is constant

MATHEIUATICAL REVIEW

The complex number z can be expressed in several ways. The Cartesian at rectangular
form for z is

^ z

jc -i- jy,

J^ where j =

and Jt and y arc real numbers referred to respectively as the real part and

the imaginary part of z- As we indicated earlier, we will often use the notation

X = (R^z], y = ^Mzl

The complex number z can also be represented in polarform as

> where r

is the magnitude of z and 9 is the angle or phase of ;. These quantities will

often be written as

= r

e \z\. =- <Z.

The relationship between these two representations of complex numbers can be de-
termined either from Euler's relation,

g}^ = cos^ + jsin^^

or by plotting ; in the complex plane, as shown in Figure P1.48, in which the coordinate axes are CR^j] along the horizontal ajtis and ^m{i) along the vertical ajtis. With respect to this graphical representation, x and y are the Cartesian coordinates of z, and r and are its
polar coordinates.

irrt y-

en
Figure Pl .48

72

Signals and Systems

Chap 1

1,48^

Let ::n be a complex nuinber with polar coordinates {rty, ^o) and Cartesian t;oordi'

nates (x^y, yo). Determine expressions for the Cartesian coordinates of the following

coii^plex numbers in terms of x^ and y^). PJot the points ^, zu-^2, r.i, i4> and z^ in
the t;i>n[iplex plane when r.j = 2 and ^^ = tt/4 and when ro = 2 and 6o = ir/2.

Indicate on your plots the real and imaginary parts of each point.

(a) Z] = r^e-^^"

= <b) zi

r^

(c) z^ = r^e^^"^""'

1-49. Express each ot the following complex nnmbers in polar form, and plot them in the

conaplex plane, indicating xhe magnitude and angle of each number:

<a) 1 + jfy

(b) -5

{c) -5 -5j

(d> 3-H4;

(e) (1 -;v^3)^

<f) (1 + }?

(B) (v^3 + /)(! - r)

(h) ^-1^

'^-'':'^ (i)

U) Ai -^ y)^^^^*

(k) U/3 + ;)2v2f-^"^^

f^ (1)

1.50.

(a) Using Euler's itlationship or Figure P1.4yj deteomne expretisionis f[jr x and y
in terms oi r and &,
(b) Determine expressions for r and in terms ot'x and y.
(c) If wt are given only r and tan &, can w& uniquely determine x and >'' Explain
your answer.

1£51, Using Euler*s relation, derive the following relationships:

(b> sine = ^\-(fJ^ - ^--"') (c) ctjf,^^ - i<l +COS20) (d) (sin9)(sini^) - \ cos(e - ^) - ^ t;os<3 + c^J

1.52, Let^ denote a complex van able: that is^
z = ^ -^ jy = rÈ^^.
The complex conjugate of :: is
s* = X - Jy ^ re'^^.
Derive each of the following relations, where z, zi^ and Z2 are arbitrary complex numbers.
(a) zz* = r^

(d> 5 - ^* = 2j^fn{z]
<e> (^1 -^ r2r - z\-\rz\ <f> ta]^^)"* ^ a^*;2, where a is anj re^l number
(g) (^)* = ^

1^3, Derivt; die following relations, where z.z^. and ^i arc arbitrary complex numbers:
(a) {e^r = ^^' (b) ;i^ f ;^;. - 2(B^{^i;;} - 2fR^K^^}

Cl'ap- 1 Problems

73

= it) Ul

l^'l

= (d) \ziZ2\

IzilUil

^ ^ + (g) (J^i|-|:2l)^

Ui +Z2p

(\zr \z2\)^

1*54. The relaiiojis considered in this problem are used on nnany tjccasinris (.hrou^hout the

(a) Prove the validity of the fcjllowsng expression:

-^ ~ I VS"'

forany c:)mpJex iiumheT^i ^ !

This is (jften referred to as ihe/inir^ sufn formula.

< (bj Show thai if |ii|

1, then

fi =U

{ -a

TViLs is often referred tu as the infinite sum formuJar {c) Show aLso if |¨| -^ i > then

^\.¨"= "
<l--¨^^

(d) Evaluate

Fr

i:

< assuming that |a| 1.
1.55* Using the results from Problem 1 54, evaluate each cjf the following sums and express your answer in Canesian i rectangular) furm:

1-5** Evaluate each of the Following it^tegrals, and express your answer in Cartesian (rectangular) form:

(c) L\^''^'''d!

^f (d)

'^-^-"V/

2
Linear time -invariant systems
2.0 JNTRODUCTION
In Section I 6 we iticn>duced and discussed a mimber of basic system properties, Twg of
theic, linearity and time invariance, play a fundamental role in signal and system analysis for two major reaiioos. First, tnany physical processes possess these properties and thus can be modeled as linear lime-invariant (LTIJ s>steii)&. In addition, LTI systems can be analysed in considerable detail, providing both insighc into their properties and a set of powerful tx>ols that form the core of signal and system anaJy.sis.
A principal objective of this book is to develop an aoderstandinE of these proper
ues and tools and to provide an introduction to several of the very important applications
in which die tools are used. In diis chapter, we begin the development by deriving and
e^amimng a fundamental and exLremely useful representation for LTI system*^ and by in-
troducing an important clasft of these systems.
One of the primary reasons LTI systems are amenable to analysis is diat any such system possesses the superposition propMty described in Section 1 .6.6. As a consequence, if we can represent the input to sn LTI system in terms of a linear cojnbination of a set of basic signals, we can then use superposition to compute the output of the system in terms
of its responses to these basic signals.
As we v^'ill see in the following sections, one of the important characteristics of the
unit iir^ulse, both in discrete time and in continuous titne, is that very general signals can be represented as linear combinations of delayed impulses. This fact, together with
the properties of superposition and time invariance, will allow us to develop a complete
m characterization of any LTI system temis of its response to a unit impulse. Such a
representation* referred to as the convolution sum in the discrete-rime case and the convo-
luiion integral in continuous time, provides considerable analytical convenience in dealing
74

Sec. 2.1

DisCfete-Ti[ne LTj Systems: The Convolulittn Sum

75

with LTI systems. FolJowing ^jur devel^jpment of the convolution sum and the convolution integral we use these charactehzatiofls to examine some of the other properties of LTI sys-
tems. We then oonsider the class of continuous time systems described by lin&ar constant-

coefficient diffcrerti^ equations and it^t di&crete-time counterpart, the class of systems

We described by linear constant-coefficient difference equations.

will return to examine

these two very inipoitatit classes of systems on a number of occasiotis in subsequent chap-

ters. Finely, we will take another look at the continuous-tin^e imit impulse function and

a number of Hjiher signals that arc cbsely related to it in order to provide sotne additional

insight into these ideaJized signals and, in paiticular, to their use arid interpretation in the

ct>ntext of analyzing LTI systems,

2. 1 DISCRETE-TIME LTJ SYSTEMS; THE CONVOLUTION SUM

2.1.1 The Representation of Dhcrete-Vme Signals in Tenns
of impulses
The key idea in visualizing how the discrete-time umt impulse can be used to construct
any discrete- time signal is to think ofa discrete-titne signal as ii sequence of individual im-
pulses. To see how thi?s intuitive picture can be turned into a mathematical representation,
consider the signal x\n\ depicted in Figure 2. 1(aJ, In the remaining parts of this ngnre,
we have depicted five time-shifted, scaled unit impulse sequences, where the scaling av.
each impulse equals the value of Jtln] at the particular instant the unit sample occurs. For example,

j[-l]6fn + IJ -

= 401, rt
0. n^O'

4.m,,^n = (J"' :;;.

^ Therefore, the sum of the five sequences in the figure equals x[fi] for -- 2 s ¨

2. More

generally, by including additional shifted, scaled impulses, we can write

jc[n\ = ... + x[-^]Slft + 3]-^ x[-2]dln + 2] + x[-[\5[n+l] + xmS[n\
+ j[l]5[/r- IJ + x[2mn-2] + x{3]S[n - 3] + ....

For

any

value

of rt,

only

one

of the

terms

on

the

right-hand

side

of eq.

(2.

) 1

is

nonzero,

and

the scaling asscxriated with that term is pretiwely Jc[n]r Writing this summatictn in & moie

compact form, we have

^ ^ jc[n]

x[k\a[n-k].

k- -^

(2.2)

This corresponds to the representaliyn of an arbitrary sequence as a linear combination of

shifted unit impulses 5[n - frj, where the weights in this linear combination iire x^k]. As

= < an example, consider x\n^ ^ uin], the unit step. In this case, since u[k]

for jt

£ --*

76

LinCitr Time Inuamnt Systems

Chip. 2

X[n]

-4 I

-1

~' j-S-2

I

2S

1

[

(a)
x[-2]B(n + 2]
-432-10234

x[-1]5[n + 1]
-4-ñ3--ñ---2ñ---- 111--0--1*--*2--34
I--"

X[0] Mn]

4-3 2 1

-- -ñ ñ *-
1 2 a*

K[1I&[n 11

-- -- -ñ"ñ ñ---ñ ñ-- ñ * ñ-

12 4-3-2-1

34

x[2]fi(n 2]

4 3 2-1

2

ñ' -

1

34

(f)
i ,

n Figure 2.1 Decomposition of a discrete time signai into a weighted
sum of shitted impuises.

Sec. 2.1

Discrete-Time LTI Systems: The Convolution Sum

77

and u[k] ^ I for ^ ^ 0, eq, (2 2) becomes
u[ft\ = ^S\n- kl

\vhich IS identical to the expression we derived in Secrion 1.4. ISeeoq. (1.67).]
Equation (2.2) is called the sjfiing property of the discrete-time unit impulse. Be-
cause the sequence S{n - k] is nonzero only when k = tu the siummatiun on the righl-
hand side of eq. (2.2) "sifts'" through the Aequence of vaJues x[k] and pre.ierv'es only the
value corresponding to k = n. In the nej^t subsection, we wilt explou this representa-
ti[>n of discrete-tinie signals in order to develop the convolution -sum rcpresentatitin fur i discrete -time LTI system.

2, f .2 The Discrete^Time Unit Jmpulse Response and the Convotution-
Sum Representation of LTI Systems

The im[>oriai]ce of the sifting property of eq^s. (2,1) and (22) lies in the fact that it repie-

s^nts x[n] as a superposition of scaled versions ofa verj' simple setof elemenlary funt;tions,

namely, shifted unit impulses b[n - k], each of which is nonzero (with value 1 ) at a single

point in Lime specified by the corresponding value of Jt. The response af a linear system

to x[n] will be the .superposition of the scaled responses of the system to each of these

shifted impulses. Moreover, the property of time invariance tells us thai the responses of a

time-invariant system to the time-shifted unit impulses are simply lin^e-shifted versions of

one another. The convolution -puna representation for discrete-time systems that arc both

linear and time invariant results from putting these two basic facts together

More specifically, coiisider the response of a linear (but possibly lime -varying) sys-

We tem to an arbitrary input x[ri].

can represent the input through eq. (2.2) as a linear

cornbin^tion of shifted unit impulses. Let hj^ln] denote the response of the linear system

to the shifted unit impulse d[n -^ t]. Then, from the superposition property for a linear

system [eqs, (1. J 23 1 and a. 124)], the response y[n\ of the linear system to iht input x[n]

in eq. (2.2) is .limpiy the weighted linear combination of these basic responses. That is,

with the input x[n] to a linear system expressed in the form of eq. (2.2>, the [ititput y[n}

can be eKpressed as

^ y[,,] =

x[k]kt[nl

(2 3)

we Thus, atcorditig to eq, <2.3>, if

kllo^v thi^ lesponse of a linear system to the set of

shifted unit impulses, we tan construct the response to an aibitrary input An interpreta-

tion of eq. (2,3) is illustrated in Figure 2.2, The signal x[n] is applied a.s the input to a

linear system whose responses h-iln], >co[n]. a¨d >i|[n] to the signals S\n -^ }], S[n], and
S[n - IJ, respectively, are depicted in Figure 2.2(b). Since x[n] can be written as a linear combination of 5[n + 1], filnj, and6[/( - 1], superposition allows ls to write the response

to x[n] as a linear comhitiation of the responses to the individual shifted impulses. The

individual shifted and scaled impulses that constitute x[n] are illustrated on the left-hand

side of Figure 2.2(c), whiie the responses tt> these component signals are pictured on the
right-hand side. In Figure 2,2(d) we have depicted the actual input x[n], which is the sum

of the components on the left side of Figure 2,2(c) and the actual output \[n], which, by

'

78

Li near Ti me- In varont System s

Chap, 2

x[n1

h_i[nl

-1
TTo *'*-
r
{a)

hoH

NN

h

n -+*

*-ñ-

£ ^ '

'*

I

m -- --

+-ñ-

(b)

FFgure 2.2 Graphical tnit¨rpretation of the response of a discrete-ttme linear
system as expressed in eq. (2.3).

superposition, i^ the sum of the components on the rigbt side of Figure 2.2(c). Thus, the
reSipoose at time n of a linear system is simply the superposition of the responses due to the input value at each point in time.
In general, of course, the responses h)i[fi] need not be related to each other for different values of k. How¨ver> if the linear system is aiso fime invunant, then these responses to time-shifted unit impulses are all time-shifted versions of each other. Specifically, since
S[n~ Jt] is a time-shifted version of S[n]^ the response hj,[n\ is a time-shifted version of

h)\n\; i.e.,

hdn] = hoin - kl

(2,4)

For notational convenience, we will drop the subscript on /lot^j ^^^ define the unit impulse
(sample) response

h{n] = h^[fi].

(2.5)

That is, h[n] is the output of die LTI system when d[n] is the input. Then for an LTl system, eq. (2,3) becomes

y[n\ --

+=o
( = -- ce

-kl

i2.6)

ITiis result is refeired to as the convolution sum or supeTposition sum, and the oper-

ation on the right-hand side of eq. (2^6) is known as the conyoluHon of the sequences x[n\

We and h\_n\.

will represent the operation of convolution symbolically as

y{n\ - x{n\^hln\

(2.7)

Sec 2.1

Di$creta-Tlme LTl Systems: The Convolution Sum

79

>t[ 1IB[n +11

x[-l]h_|[nj

l_TM^

* **

t **

!

n

x[0]fi{n]

1
^[0] h.[nl

UU r"^

+

Ji

xl1]6[n-1]

xl1]h|[n]

-*-¨^ (c)

x[nj
-ñ-ñ'
r

czc>

y[nl

-*+

I*

(<J)

Figure ;z,z Continued

Note th^t eq. (2.6) expresses the response of ^n LTI system to an arbitrary input in
terms of the system's response to the unit impulse. From this> we see that an LIT system
is completely characterized by its response lo a single signal, namely, its response lo the
unit impulse.
The interpretation of eq. (2.6) is similar to the one we gave foreq. (2.3), where, in the
case of an LTI system, the response due to the itiput x [ k] applied at time k\sx[k]h[n- k];
i.e,, it is a shifted and scaled version (an **echo") of h[n]. As before, the actual output is
the superposition of all the^e responses.

80

LinBar Ttme-I nvariart Systems

Chap, 2

Exampie 2.1

Consider an LTI system with impulse respon&e h[n] and input x[n], as iLLustratcd in Figure 2.3(a). For tlus case, stTic:e only x{Q] and x[\\ are rKwnena. eq. (2.6) simplifies to

the -e^ipTession

= y[n] x[U\h[n - 0] + x[\]h[n - \] = D.5h[n] -\- 2h{n - l).

(.2.8)

The sequences (X 5h[n\ and 2h[n-- 1 ] are tfie two echoes of the impulse re&poose Deeded for the superposition involved in generating yln\. These echoes are displayed in Figure 2.3(b)H By tpumnung the tA'o echoes for each valueof n, we obtain y[ri]^ which is shown in Figure 2.3(c),

h{n]
LU

0.5
1

Jt[n]

OS

0-..^5.hH(if-i.]j

. T TT. .

1

2

3f * f 2li[n-l]

1 (tj)
2,5
D.S,
1

Vlr]

FJgure 2.3 (a) The rmpulse rssponse hin] of an LTI system and an iitpLt

;f[n] tc the system: (b) the responses or "echoes," (i.5h[n] and 2!J[n - 1], to

= x^ ^ the nonzBro values of th^ input, namely, ;f[0]

0.5 and

2; (c^ the

ovarafl response y[f>l which l$ tie sum Of th¨ echos In (b).

Sec 2 1

Discrete'Time LT Systems The Convolution Sum

SI

By considering the effect of the superposition sum on each individual output sample^

we obtain another very useful way to \isualiie thccaJculationof >[¨] using the convolution
A sujh. In particular, consider the evaluation of the oiitput value at some specific time n.

particularly ccinvenient way of displaying this calculation graphically begins with the two

signaJs j:[k] and k[n - k] viewed as functions of jt. Multiplying these two functions^ we

nbtain a sequence g[k] = x\k\h\n -- k], which, at each time k, is seen to represent the

We contribution of jif[Jt] to the output at Lime n

conclude that summing all the samples

in the sequence of ^[k] yields the output value iit the elected time n. Thus, to calculate

y[n] for all values of n requires repeating this procedure for each value of ^r. Fortunately,

changing the value of n h<LS a very simple graphical interpretation for the two signals .T[k] and ^[rt - ;:!, viewed as functions ofjt. The following examples illustrate this and the use

of the aforementioned viewpoint in evaluating convolution sums.

Example 2.2

Let us consider i^gain (he convoiution problem encountered in Example 2.1. The se-
h quence x\k] \howri in Figure 2r4Va), w.iile the sequence h\n - k], for n iijced and

viewed as a function of fe, is sJiownJo Figure 2.4(b) for several difTerent valuer of /i. in
-- sktttbin^ these !:^uen<.es, we have used the fact that h[n k] {viewed as j funciiun of

A wi[h n fijied) is a time-revei&ed and shifted vefsion of the impul^ re^pttnse h[k\. In

purtii^ular, as k increases., the argnnnent n -- it decrtsMes, explaining the need to pertorm u

n- li me reversal of h[ k] . Knowing thi s , then in order to sketch the Hignal h[

k\.wt need

{]nly determine its value for some particular vaJue of k. For exampie, the ar^umem n -- k

*ill equal at the value k = n. Thus, if we sketch the signal h[- kl we can obtain the

- signal hln fc] simply by shifting to thu tight <by n) if n is positive or to the left if rt is

< negative. The result for our example for valuc^ yf n

> 0^ ri = 0, 1£ 2, 3j and n

3 are

shown in Figure 3.4(b). Having sketched jtlAl and h[n -- k] for any pEiritular value of tt, we mnltiply

these two signals and snm over alt values of A. Pch: our example, for ¨ < 0, we scefmtn
Figure 2.4 that jlijfcfn - /;] - t> for all ^, iince the nonzero values of i[^]and/ilri - k]
< = do not overlap. Cimsequently, >'[nj = for n 0. For rt 0, since the product of the
-- sequence x[k] ^ith the sequence ft[0 jt] hajs only one nonzero sample with the value

0.5, *ctuih:ludethac

ym ^ -

""^^MO - Jt] - 0,5.

(2.9>

The product of the sequence if A] with the sequence ^[1 - k] has two nonzero samples, which may be summed to obtain

X ^^^^ "=

^'^l^n - ^] = 0.5 + 2.Q - 2.5.

*- -^

(2,10^

Simi Early,

^ vl21 =

If
x[k]h[2 - k] = 0.5 + 2.0 = 2.5,

(2.1 1)

and

--1

az

Linear Time-Invariant Systems

Chap. 2

M!
n-2 n-1 n

-- -- -*

i-^

'

*-

1

(a)

'rii..
-2 -1

K[kl
n<0 h[ii-k],
k
k

.'1 1

-1

1

h[l -k] k

h(2-k]

1

k

1-
h[3-k|

T1

1

23

k

h[r-k], n>3

--

-- -- -- ñ" ñ- ¨ ñ--

! r1

n-S n-1 n k

da]

Figure 2,4 Interpretation aJ Bq. (2,6) forttie sJgwIs t}{n\ and x[n] in Fig-

ure 2.3; (a) the signaJ x[k] and (b) tN signal fj{n - k] (as a funfrtion cf ^

^ < = > with a fixed) for severaf values n {n 0: n

Q, ^. 2, 3: n

3], Each

of tiresft signate is obit^fied by reHectiEin and shiftrrp of ilia unit impulse re-

sponse fi[f(]. The response y{n] for each value of ^ is obtalrMd by muJiipiying
the signals x[k} ard h[tj ~ k] in (b) ^nd (c) 4nd then summing ttie products

over all vaJuas of jt. The calculation for this examplfl is carhed out in detail In

Example 2.Z

V ^[3] =

Jc[kM2 -k] = 10,

CI 12)

> Finallyn for fi 3+ the produce j[tl/t[n - k] is zero for all k^ from which we coticlude > that y\n] = for n 3, Tlie resulting ouipDt values agree with those otrtained in Exam-
ple 2.1.

Sec. 2,1

Discrete Time LTF Systems: The Convolution Sum

83

Example 2.3
Consider an input jc[nl and a unit impulse response hln] given by

= Afn] i^n\.

0< < with

a 1, These signals are illusirated in. Figure 2.^, Also, to help us in yisualizing

and caiculatisg the convoIudDn of the E-L^na]s£ in Figiure 2.6 we have depicted the signal

4'tJfoUowedbyft[-jt],A[-l-Jt],and/t[l-Jtl(thatis,h[n~jtHorn = 0. -1, and^^l)
and, fiaally, h[n ^ t] for an arbitrary positive valve of n and an arbitrary negative value

< of n. From this figire, we note that for tj 0£ diere is no oveiiap between the nonrcro

- < = points in x{k] and h[n

k]. Thus, for /i

- 0, ;if[jtl/i[n

jfel

for all values ofk, and

^ hetice, from eq.

we (2.6),

see that y[rt]

=

0. n

< 0. For n

0,

"- (? MJtlA[

=

^ k^n
oItherwise

^[n] = a"u[nl h[nl = u[nl

liniiiTTit nil
(a)

(b)
Figure Z.5 The signals x[n\ and tt\n] in Example 2.3.
Tlius, for rt ^0,

k = *}

and usmg the result of Problem 1 .54 we can write this as

1

_ji+i

Thus, for all n.

(2.13)

ITie signal ylnl is sketched in Figure 2.7.

1

84

Linear Time-lnvarianl Systems

Chap 2

11f1

h[r- k]

n>0

h[n-kj

n<0

Figure 2-6 GfapJiical interpretation of the calculation of the convolution
u k) r r I rur CAdrrippC ^ j-_

Sec 2.1

Discrete-Ume LTI Systems: The Convoktion Sum

85

(^)*' yfnj =

1
l-o

tittI
1 1
1 1
1

i

>¨ *

*

Figure 2.7 Qutpi^t for Example 2,3,

The operation of convolution is sometimes described in terms of 'Kliding ' the se-

quence h[tr-- k] past x\_k]. For example, suppose we have evaluMed y[n] for some partic-

-- ular v^ue of n, sayt a

no- That Ls£ we have sketched the signal h[n(i -- fe], multiphed it

-- -- by the signal x[k], and summed the result over all values of jt. To evaluate y[n] at the next

we value of rr

= + i.e,, ft

rto 1

^'e need to sketeh the signal ft[(no + l> -- fc] However,

-- can do this simply by taking the signal A [no A] and shifting it to the nght bj one point.

For each successive value of ¨, we continue this process of shifting h[n - i^] Lo the right

by one point, multiplying by x\k]^ and summing the result over jt.

Example 2.4

As a further example, consider the cv^o ^quenijei^
^n ^4
Otherwise

and

- h[n]1

f ff".

Q ^n ^t
otherwise

ThesesignalsaredepictedinFigure2.8forapositivevalueof ff > L In order tci ejaculate
the convolution of the twu signals, it is convenieutta consider five separate intervals for n. This is illuiptrated in Figure 2-9.
< Interval 1. For n 0, there is no overlap between tht nonzero portions of x[k] and
= h[n - k], UDd consequently, y[n\ (i.
laterval 2. For :^ ¨ ^ 4,

x\k^h[^^ - k^ =

>\-k

^k^n

otherwise

1

Bt

LFnear TirT>9'lnvana:it Systems

Chap, 2

ttt

y^in]

-2-1

1 2 3 45

m

-z-^ 1 1 T 1
1 234 56 7

Figure 2.B T^e signaJs to be canvolvfld in Example 2.4

Thus, in this imeival,
n

(2.14)

Wc can evaluate this sum using the finite sum formula, eq. (2.13X Specilically, changing = iJ\c variable of suirunation tn cq. (2.14) frotn Jt to r n - t^ we obtain

< ^ iDterval 3. Far n > 4 but ¨ - 6 :^ (i,e,>4 n

6),

^jtlMfl - *i =

s jt ^ 4
dtherwise

Thu&, in this interval,

(2.15)

Once aguiDf we caause the ^eotDetric &'um fEmnula ineq. (2.13) to evaluate eq. (2. 15),
Specilically, factoring out the constant fact^ir of a" from the SLimMadoa in eq. (2,L51
yields

n> IniervaJ 4. For

6hutn-b ^ < A (i.e., For 6 n ^ 10),

(2.161

1 0,

othtnvi^e

K[K]

4

h[n-ki
Uiiu
n
n-6
(b1
hin-kj

n<
^ n ^4

n-^6

n
{^)
h(n-kj

Uii

n-6

n
(d)

h[n-k]

U
I
n-e

hin-k]

4 = r ^6

^ 6 -^ n

10

IflTTT....
n-6
ff)
Figure 2.9 Graphical iirterp relation of the convolution performed in Example 2.4.
67

'

88
so that

Lirwar Time-Invariant Systems

Chap. 2

W&caa again useeq. (2.13) to evaluate this summation- Letting r = jt -- n -h 6^ we obtain

^r-^

^ = [a r

ft"

1 "Of '

1 " Of

- > Interval 5. For n fi 4^ or cquivalently, n > 10, diere is do overlap between the
nonzero portions of jf[A] and h\n - k\. and hence.
y[n] - a

Sommarizing, then^ we obtain

0.

= >'tnJ

{

1 - tt"'

^
1

-a

- 1

ff

'

0.

n<
^^n ^A

< È 6

/I

10

10<fl

which is pictured in Figure 2, 10.

Figure 2. 1

1 1
1

1

fT

46

10

n

Result ot perfofming the convolution in E>^mple 2 4,

Example 2.5

Consider ail LTl system with input x[t^\ and umt impulse-response h[n\ ipcciJied as
follows;

x[n\ = 2"u[-til
h[n] = u[n^

(2.17> (2 IS)

Sac 2.1

Discrete-Time LH Systems: The Convolution Siim

89

K[k] = 2Sj[ -hj

*tT L -2 -1

-ñ ¨ * *-

t' t
fa)

h[n- kl -* ñ-

2i

1

i1

2

tTt
.

ytrrl

I
-3-2-1

1

2

3

Figure 2.11 (a) TJie sequen:es x[k] and /)[n-iif] for the convolution prob\em considered in Example 2.5; (b) the resuiling output signa! y[n]

The

sequences

;? [^J

and /i[n

- J;]

are

plotted

as

functioni

of k

in

Fjguie

2.

a) 1 1 1

.

Note

that

k> We x[k] is sere for

> and /ilfi - A'] is zero for k n.

also observe that, regardless; of

the value of ?c. the sequence x\k]h[n - k] always has nonzero samples a^ong the A-axis.

^ When fl

0. .r|ij^l n - k] has noniero samples in the imerval it ^ 0. It follows that,

fyr n ^ 0,

X Z >[nl =

^f*^^^'^ - ^1 =

2'

(2.19)

To eviluati; the infinitt sium in eq. (2- 19), we may use the injirfite sum formula,

^,,* = L-^ 0<|ftj< 1. ^
* =u

(2.20)

Changing the vun^ble of summation in eq, (2 J9) from jt to r = --k, we obtain

1

= 2.

1 2.21 >

Thus, >[n] takes on a constant value of 2 for n ^0.

90

LIrwaf Tlrna-lnvafiant Systems

Chap. 2

< When n 0, xlk]k[n - k]has nonzero sampks for > ^ n. It foljows thai, for

y[n] = ^st[jtlAiJn- tl = 21 2*.

(2.22)

By performing a change of variable i = --k and then tn = t + n^wc can again make
use of the iniinlte sum. fonnuLan eq. (2.20)^ to evaluate the sum in eq. (2. 22). The result
IS the following for /i <: 0:

Tlie complete sequence of y[n] is sketched jn Figure 2. 1 L(b)r
These examples illustrate the usefulness of visualizing the calculation of the con-
volution suiu gr^hically. Moreover, in addition to providing a useful way in which to calculate the response of sa LTI system^ the convolution sum also provi<les an extremely
useful representation for LTt systems that allows us to examine their properties in great
detail. In particular^ in Section 2.3 we will describe some of the properties of convolution
and will also examine some of the system properties Introduced in the previous chapter in order to see how these propertaes can be characterized for LTI systems.
2,2 CONTINUOUS-TTME LTf SYSTEWS; THE CONVOLUTION INTEGRAL
la analogy with the results derived and discussed in the preceding section, the goal of this section is to obtain a complete characterization of a continuous-time LTI system in terms
-- of its unit hnpulse response. In discrete lime, the key to our developing the convolution
sum was the sifting property of the discrete-time unit impulse that is, the maihenmica]
representation of a signal a^ the supeipositioi) of scaled and shifted unit impulse functions.
Intuitively, then, we can think of the discrete-lime systMn as responding to a sequence of individual impulses. In continuous time, of course, we do not have a discrete sequence of input values. Nevertheless, as we discussed in Section 1 .4.2, if we think of the unit im-
pulse as the idealization of a pulse which is so short that its duration is incousequentid for
any real, physical system, we can develop a representation for arhttrary continuous-time
signals in tertns of these idealized pulses with vanishingty small duration, or equivalently,
impulses. This representation is developed in the next subsec^on, and. following tbet, we wi^l proceed very much as in Section 2.1 to develop the convolution integral representation
for continuous-time LTI systems.
2.2.1 TTre Repfesentatlon of Continuous-Time Sl^nalf in Terms of Impulses
To develop the continuous-time counterpart of the discrete-time sifdng property it^ eq. (2.2). we begin by considering a pulse or "staircase*' aipproximation£ i(f)£ to a continuous-time signal xiOi as illustrated in Figure 2,l2(a). In a manner similar to that

Sec, 22

Contnuous-Time LTt Systems: The Convolution Integral

91

m

y>'if^

/Mr^ ^^^^^^jj^

1

'

1

1

-A

rxN

=^,

t

'

1

'

¨h

^^^ta.^
^

--^^--

** ññ

1

N

J

1

A 2A

ki

i^-2A)
a
-2A -i
(b)

-i
(c) x(CI)64{t)A
A
(d)
1--iKfA)
is.ih
l&J

Figure Z.I 2 Staircase approxima-
tion to a continuauÈ-trrne signal.

:

92

Linear Time-lnvarianT Systems

Chap. 2

employed in the discrete-time case, this approximation can be expressed as a linear com-
^ bination of delayed pulses, illustrated in Figure 2. 12{a)-(e). If we define

'^""^
othenviie

(2.24,

then, since A6i(r) has unit amplitude, we have the expressiwri

m^ 2 ^<t^)^AU-'tA)i x= -=

(2.25)

From Figure 2. 12, we see that, as in the discrete-time case [eq. (2,2)1, for any value ot only one term in the summaiion on the right-hand side of eq. <2.25) is nonzem
As we lei A approach 0^ the appro Jtin^ati on xir) becomes better and better, and in the
limit equals xU)- TTierefore,

xi/) = hw y^ .c(jtA)5i(:- ^A)A
-^-'^^^

[2.26)

Also, as A "* 0, the summation ineq. (2.26) itpproathes an integral. Thir> can be seen by

cosisidering the graphitu! inlerpre^atw^n of the equation, illustrated in Fij^urc 2.13. Here,

We we have illustrated the signals x(t\ S^(t - t), and their product.

have al.io indicated

-- a shaded region whose area approaches the area under j:(T-)6i(f -- t> ax i j- Note that

< mA the shaded region has an area equal to ximA) where ! -- A

< f. Furthermore, for

thLi value of r. only the term with k = ml^ nonzero in the summation in eq. (2,26)s and

thus, the righl-hand iide of this equation also equals x{mA). Consequently, it follows from

eq (2,26) and from the preceding argument diat x{T) equals the limit as A -^ of the area
A under rV{T)^i(f -- t). Moreover, from eq. (1 74), ve know that the limit as -' ot^A^'')

IS the unit impulse function 5(0, Consequently,

r -l-K.

A(0 =

x{T)du -t)Jt.

(2,27)

As in discrete time, we refer to eq, (Z.27) as the sifting property of the tontinuous-linie

We impulse.

note that^ for the specific example of x(t) - u{t). eq, (2.27) becomes

u{t) =

u(r)6(t - T)dj =

Sit - t)^t,

(2.28)

< -- > since m<t) = Oforr Oand H(r)

1 for t O.EqiHitioti{2,2S) iii identical to eq. (1,75^

derived in Section 142.

Once ag^n^ eq. (2.27) should be viewed as an idealization in the sense that, for
A "small enough,"' the approximadoti of x(r) in eq. (2.25) is esientially ejcact for any

practical purpose. Equation (2,27) then simply represents an idealization of eq. (2 25) by
A taking to be vanishingly small. Note also that we could have derived eq. (2.27) directly

by using several of the basic properties of the unit impulse that we derived in Section 1 .4.2,

Sec. 2.2

Cantinuaus-TiFTie LTI Systems: Tlie Convolution Integral

93

{a)
Bitt --)
1
A
1
1- A

c-i

t

-H

fc)

Fiqiav 2,13 Graphical jnteipreta-
tjon of eq. (2.26).

-- Specifically, as illustrated in Figure 2.14(b), the signal S{r r) (viewed as a function of

= T with t fixed) is a unit impulse located at t f. TTius, as shown in Figure 2.14<c)^ the

signal x(T)S(t ~ r) (once ag^n viewed as a function of t) equals xit)S(r - t) [i.e,, it is a

scaled impulse at t = / with an area equaJ to the vatue of j (f)]. Consequently, the integral

-- = of this signal from t = ¨ to t

+*) equals x(t): that is*

+¨

Jf(r)6U

-

tMT

=
=1,

Mtmt - T)dT = X(t)

Sit - T)d7 = xUl

Although this d&rivation follows directly from Section 1.4.2, we have included the deriva-
tion given in eqs, (2.24)-(2.27) to stress the similarities widi the discrete-time case and, in particulai-, to emphasize the interpretation of eq. (2,27) as representing the signal x{t) as a "sum*' (more precisely, an integral) of weighted, shifted impulses.

9+

Linear Time- Invariant Syste fns

Chap 2 .

(a)
m-r)

(b)
X(T}f^t-T) = x(t)5(t-^
x(t)

Figure 2*14 (a) AiDitrarv Siflrwl
-- x(t); (b| impulse 6^f x) as a furtction

T of wtfith f fbfed: (c) product of th^e

(c)

two signals.

2.2.2 Tlie Continucxi5-71me Unit Jmpube Response and the
Convolution Integral Representation of LT1 Systems
As in the discrete-time case, the representation developed in the preceding secdon provides Its with a way in which to view an arbitrary coritinuous-tiane sign^ as the sup^position of
scaled and shifted pulses. In particular, the approximate representation in eq. {2^25) reprc-
&MAS the signal xit} as a sum of scaleii and shifted ver&ions of the basic pulse signal &\{t).
Conseqijently, the response y(r) of a linear system to this signal will be the superposition of the responses to the scaled and shifted versions of 5^^/). Specifically, let us define >ijti<r>
as the re&pot^se of an LTI systerti to the input d^(r - M). Then, from eq. (2.25) and the superposition property, for continuous-dme hntar systems, we see that

m X =

^(JtA>^ti(OA-

* = -¨

(2.29)

The interpretation of eq. (2.29) is similar to ^at for eq. (2.3> in discrete tinie. In particular, consider Figure 2.15, which is die continuous-time counterpan of Figure 2.2. In

Sec. 2.2

Continijous-Tlrie LTI Systerris The Convolution Integral

95

x(t^

K(0|
{]
Q&.
A^)
H
x{hi)
a
kA

[aj
^

^b)
^

K^i;fiiW:i

fc)
^

K{kA)hni(t)i

td|
yi\)
^
v^^A.
(e)
Wt)
^
'\/^^W
(n

Figure 2^ 15 Graphical Irterpreta-
tion of the response of a con^nuoas-
m tir>ie linear system as expressed
eijs. (2.29) and <2.30).

95

Lrnsar Time-Invariant Systems

Chap. 2

Figure 2.15(^) we hav& depicted the input x{i) audits approxirnation A(f), while in Figure
2. J 5<b)-(d), we have shown the responses t>f ihe systenk ta thre& of the weighted pulses in

the expression for ^(r). Then the output y(r) corresponding to x{t) is the siiperpoiiitioii of

dli of these responseSn as indicated in Figure 2, 15(e).

Whai remains, then, Is to consider what happens as i becomes vaDishingl^ sroall--

A i.e., as

-^

I ri particular, with j;(f) as ejtpressed in eq. t2,26), i(r) becomes an increas-

A -- ingly good apprtjx inflation to x(t]^ and in fact, die two coincide a^

* 0. Consequenily,

the respon.^e to ^tOn namelj£ yit] in ^. (2,29), Tnust converge to y{t)^ the response to the attuaJ input r(f), as iljustr^ted in Figure 2 15(f). Furthermore, as we have A said, foi 'small enough," the duration of the pulse 6i(r - jtA) is of no signiftcance^ iti that, as far as

the s>stem is concerned, the response to ihis pulse is esiientiaJl) the same as the response
to a unit impulse :it the same point in time. That is, since the pulse ^^(f -- fcA) corresponds to a shifted uml impulse as A -+ 0> the response htrA^W to this input pulse becomes the response to an impulse in the liniit. Therefore, if we let At(') denote the response if tiine t to a unit impulse S{t - r) located at time t, then

y1 --

y{t\ = Jim

jf(*A>fnA(OA.

k=-^

(2.30)

^ As A

0, the summation on the right-hand side becomes an integral, as can be seen

graphically in Figure 2. 16. Specifically, in Figure 2.16 the shaded rectangle represenii* one
term in the summation (m the right-hand side of eq, (2.30) and as A -> the summadon

approaches the area under T(r)/i^(rJ viewed as a function of t. Therefore,

yU) =

X(T)h^{t)dT.

(2.31)

The interpretation of eq. (2J1) is analogous to the one for eq. (2,29). As we showed
in Section 22.1, any input x(0 can t>e represented as

xit) =

x(t)SU - r)dT,

Kb)ri,(t)

ful

(k+t}A

Figure 2.1 6 Graphical pllustration

^$ of

(2.30) and (2 31).

Sec. 1.1

Continuobs-Time LTl Systems: The Convolution litetjral

97

That is> we <;an intuitively think of xii) as a "sum"* of weighted shifted impulses, where tJie weight on the impulse b{i - r) is x{j)dT. With this inteipretarion, eq. <2,? 1 ) represents
the superpojjition of the responses to each of these inputs, and by linearity, the weight
en the response h^{t) to the shifted impulse 6(r - r) is also xir^dr.
Equation (2.31} represents the general form of the response of a linear system in
continaouK lime. If, in addition t& being linear, the system is also time invariant, then
hAt') ^ -- h\\{i t): i.e., the response of an LTI system to the unit impulse fi(r -- t), which
is shifted by t seconds froiti the origin, is a similarly shifted version of the response to the unit impulse funcrion S(0^ Again, for no^tional convenience^ %ve wiVi drop the subscript and detine the unit impulse respnnse h(f) as

Ki) = Mr);

(2.32)

],È., kit) is the response to S(t). In this case, eq. <2.3l) becomes

y(r) =

x{r)hit - tWt

(2.33)

Equation <2.33), refenned to as the convolution intei^ratoT the superposition {titegrai,
i^ the condnuous'time counterpart of the convoluti'sn sum of cq, (2.6) and coMcsponds to the representation of a conttnuous-time LTI sy.^tem in tcmu of its response to a unit itnpuli^e. The convoludon of two s^nals x(/) and h{i) will be represented symbolically as

yii) = x{t)*hii).

(2.34)

While we have chosen to use the same symbol ^ to denote beth discrete-time and

continuous-time convolution, the context will generally be sufficient to distinguish the

two cases.

As in dist^rete times we see thai a continuous-time LTI system is completely char-

acterized by its impulse response--i.e., by its response to a single elementary signal, the

unit impulse 5(f), In the next section, we explore the implications of this as we examine

a number of the properties of convoludon and of LTI systems in both contiruous time and

discrete time.

The procedure for evaluating the convolution integral is quite similar to that f{>r its

discrete-time counterpart, the convolution sum. Specifically, in eq, (233) we see that, for

any vaJue of c, the oiitput y{i) is a weighted integrai of the input, where the weight on

we t(t) is k{t -- t). To evaluate this integral for a specific value of u

first obtain the signal

-- hU T) (regarded as 3 function of r with t fised) fjron> /i(t) by a reflection about the origin

> < We and a shift to the right by / if f

or a shift to the left by |f | for f 0.

next multiply

together the signals j:|t) and hit - t\ and ><f) is obtained by integrating the resulting

product from T = -ixtoT= -I-TM To illustrate the evaluation of the convolution integral,

let us consider several exainples.

98

LmearTrme-lnvarifint Systems

C^ap 2

Bxample 2^6
Let xU) be the input lo an LTI system with unit impulse respoiLse ftiii^ where

and

MO = ufi).

Ir Figure 2.17, we have depicted tlie functions h(T\ jrir), and A(r - t^ for a negative valueof/andfor apo-'iitivevaiueaf;. From this figure, we see thac for f < 0, the product
> oi jf^r) and h{t - t) is zero, and consetjuently, y(;) is zero. For f 0.

Mr)h{f T> =
0,

< T</
othe*"wise

h(T}

hft -t)
t
h(t-Tl

KO

t.-O

t

T

Ffgure 2. 1 7 Calculaion ot the convojution integral for Example 2.6

Sac 2 2

Cwtinucus-Tlme LTl Systems- The Convolution Integral

99

From this expression, we can con^te y(i) for ( > 0:

= >'C0
c

ThuSj for all i, yit) is

= -(1 - e-^').
a
}iO - -d -e^'Mtl

which is shown in Fig.ure 2.18,

Figure 2.16 Response of the systern In Example 23 with impulse re-

= ^ spi>n5¨ /f{t}

i/{t} to the ifiptJt ;if{f)

^ ^i/(^)

Example 2.7

Consider the convolution of the following tw-o sign^s:

= xii) 1, 0<f < T
0. otherwiw

h(t) =

^ f < 2r
otherwitt

As in Example 2.4 for discrete-time convoJuiioii, it is convenient to consider the evalu-

^ion of y(f> in separatt intervals. In Figure 2.19+ v/t have .sKetched j(t) and have illus-

> = < trated A(f--T) in each of the tntcrvals of mtcrest. For r

ami for/ ;?Z^, x(T)hii--'r}

for all valueft ttf Tj and consec^uently, y(f) -- Or For the other intervals, the product

-- n r{T>At( Ti as indicated in Figure 2.20. Than, for these three intervals, the int¨gtatian

can b^ carried out graphically, with th^ result that

0,
If +ri + iT'
[0,

t <0 0< t< T T ^t <2T
27 < ^ < 37
37 <t

which is depicted iniTgurc 2.21.

too

m 'h
T
J
- 2T
t - 2T

t<D

O'.-t^ T

t - 2T
h(t- 7)
--2T

/

t

t 2T

h(t -T}

0^^
h \ -
Hi -)

T -: f - 2T 3r 2T ^.- t -:

t^-ST

/ t-2T

Figure z. f 9 Exampfe 2.7

Signals Afr} and /r(? - t) for different valyes of / for

Sac. 2 2

Contfrtifous X'me LTf Systefiis; The ConvcMtoff Ititeflral

101

x(T)rnt-Tj
!k
t (a)

0<t<J

xWiifl-f)
4s T

T - t < ÈT

x[T)ha-T)
2T
t-Th
^ T
1-2T
(c)

2T -^ t <; 3T
T

Figure 2,20 Prodjct x{7)f}{t - r) for Example 27 for the three rar>ges of
values or t for which iliis prDducl is not identically zero. (Sea Fioure 219,]

y^

T

3T 3T

t

Rgtir¨ Z.Zf = Signal y(f) x{t)*tJ{t) tor Example Z.7.

Example 2.8

Let y{i) denote the convoluticn of the following two si^d&:

(2.35)

(2.3^53

-- We The signals j:(t) and kit t) arc plotted as functLons of r in Figure 2.Z2(iX

first

obsene that these two signals have legions of nonzero over]^£ fegar(ILes.>; of the value

\02

Lhiear Tima-lnvartaTTl S^tems

Chap, 2

1
t-3

Figure 2.22 The ccnvcflutjofi problem considered in Example 2.3.

of/. When t -- I ^0, the produclof j(t> and /i(f -- t) ls nonzero for -=; < t < r - 3,
and the convolution integral becomes

Mn =

rH

= E^'c/T

- ,icr-Si

[2.3'^>

< Forf-- 3 ^- Ojtheproduct j:(r)h<f-- T)LftiKtnzeTofc5T -*> T < Oh so ihat the convolution
integral is

Kf) = f^Vr = i I

t2-:^&)

The resulting signal yU) is plotted in Figitre 2.22(b).
As these examples and those pitisented in Section 2.1 iilu^tr^te^ the graphical iJiterpretation cf continuous-titne and discnete-cime convolution is of considerable value in visualizing the evaJuation of convolution integrals and sums.

Sac. 2.3

Properties of Linear Time-lnvariajit Systems

1 03

2,3 PROPERTIES OF LINEAR TIME-lNVARJAFSft SYSTEMS
[n the preceding two sections, we developed the extremely important representations
uf continuous^-time and discrete-lime LTl systems in terms of their unit impulse responies. In discrete time the representation lakes the fonn of the t;onvolutJon sum, while
its continuous- time counterpart is the convolution integral, both of which we repeat here
for convenience:

y[n] = y(f) =

-k] = X[ll]^ h[n]
Jc(7)h(l - T)dT - x{f) + Mf)

(2.3^) (2.40)

As we have pointed out, oue consequence of these representations is thai tVie chaiat-
teristics of an LT[ system ar^ completely determined by its impulse response. It is important to emphasize that this property holds in general only for LTl systems. In particular, as illustrated in the following example^ the unit impulse response of a nonlinear system does
not (completely characterize the behavior of the system.
Example 2.9
Consider u discrete-time system with unit impute response

[ 0, otherwise

Ifthe system is LTl,thfcrL eq. (2.41) completely deierminefc its mput'output behavior. In
particular, by substituting eq. (2 41) into the convolutiou sum, eq, (2.39), we find the following explicit equation describing how the input and output of this \JT[ system are
related:

j.[nl = ^lnl + 4rt- U.

(2.43)

-- On the other hand, ttiere tire many uonltnear siystems with the s&ax response i.e., that
given iaeq. (2,41)--^to theLuputS[nl. For example, b<*th of the following syslenishave
this property 1

yln] = {x\n] + x\n - \])\

= y[n]

- maji(j;[nj£ j:[n 1]),

Conshequently, if the system is nonlinear it is noi completely characterized by the impuhe
response in eq. (2.41).

The preceding e?ianiple illustrates the fact that LTl system.^ have a t^umberof prop^
erties not possessed by other syijtems, beginning with the very special representations that
they havein terras of convolution sums and integrals, in the remainder of thL^ section, we explore some of the most basic and important of these properties.

1

1 04

Lin&ar Tioie- Invariant Systems

Chap 2

2-3.1 The Commutative Property
A basic property of t;tm\oluticn in both coTitinii<ju;> and discrete time is that it is a commu-
iative operation. That is. in discrete time

^ x[n]*h[n] = h[n]^x[n] =

h[k\x[n - k],

(2.43^

atid in continuous lini^

= x(f\ + Ml)

= hit) * x(i)

k(T)x{t - T)dT.

(2.44)

Thes<i expressions can be verified in a straightforward manner by tneans of a substitution
of variables in eqs. (2.39) and (2.40). Ft>T example, in the discrete-tune case, if we Itt r = 71 - ^ or, equivalencly, A = /t - /", eq. (2.39) becomes

^ ^ x{n] + h[n\ =

x[k]h[n - k] =

x[n - r]h[r] - h[n] * x[n].

(2.45)

With this substitution of variables, the roicsn of j;[rtj and /([¨] are interchanged. According i.v eq. {2A5)^ the output of an LTl system with input j[fl] and unit impulse response h[n] is identical to Ibc output uf an LTl system with input h[n\ and unit impulse response x[n]
For example, we could have calculated the convolution in Example 2A by tirst reflecting -- and shifting x\_k]^ then multiplying the signals x[n k] and h[k], and finally summing the
products for all valuer of Jt.
Similariy, eq. (2.44) can be verified by a change of variables, and the implications of diis result in corttinaoiis time are the same: The output of an LTl system ^vith input xit) and UFiit impulse response h{t} i.^ ideiitical u> the t>utput of an LTl system with input h{t) and unit impulse respOEse xit). Thus, wecould have calculated the convolution in Example 2.7 by reflecting and shifting x(T)> multiplymg the signals x{i - r) and h(r\ and integrating
< over -X < T +¨. fn specific cases, one of the two forms for computing tonvolutionji
[i e., eq, (2.39) or (2.43) in discrete time and ecj, <2.40) or (2.44) in continuous time] may
'be easier to visualize, but both forms always result in the same answer,

23,2 The Distributive Property

Another basic property of con volution is tUt^ distributive property. Specific ally, convolution distrihuteii over addition, so that in discrete time

xrn]*(fi][r£l+ ft^N) = x[n\*h\[R] 4 \[n\* h2[n],

(2.46)

and in continuous time

hM + x(t}*^\h](t\ h2{t)] =-ñ x(t) ^

+ x(t) * hi(tX

(2,47

This property can be verified in a strdghtforward manner.

Sec. 2.3

Properties ot Linear Time-Invariant Systems

OS

y^{i>

^{l)

xft)

1Q

ñ-Vft)

t-^(t)

J
y3{t>

{a)

X(t)'

hi(t)-nj(i)
^b)

*- y(i)

Figure 2^23 Interpretation of the
distributive property of convolution for a parallef interconnection of LTi systems

The distributive property has 4 useful interpretation in terms of system interconnections. Consider two continuous- time LTI systeins in parallel, as indicated inHgure 2.23(a). The systems shywn in the block diagram are LTI systems with Lhe indicated unit impulse responses. This pictorial representation is a particularly convenient way in which to denote LTI systems in block diagrams, and it also reempha-^izes the fact that the impulse response of an LTI sysiem completely characterizes its behavior.
The two systems, with impulse responses /ii(0 and h2U), have identical inpjls, and
their outputs are added. Since

= VE(/i

x[r) =^/i|(r)

and

= .V2(f)

x{f) =^ ^^2(0-

the system uf Figure 2. 23 (a) has output

y{r) = jr(r) + /t](j)^ Mi)*h(tl

(2.48)

corresponding to the right-hand side of cq, (2.47). The system of Figure 2,23fb)has output

= y(n .K{r)^[h]it) + h2{r)l

(2.49)

corresponding to the left-hand side of eq. (2.47). Applj'ing eq. (2.47) to cq. (2.49J and
comparing the result with eq, (2,48), we sec that the sy^£tems in Figures 2.23(a) and (b)
are identicaL
There is an ideDtical interpretation in discrete time, in which each of the signals in Figure 2.23 is replat:ed by a discrete-time counterpart (i.e., jr(r), /ii(/), ft2U\ y](t\ yzi^X and v(/) arc replaced by j:[¨], A|lnl, ftzlil. Vilfll, y;[n]> and y[n], respectively). In sumn^ary, then, by virtue ot the distributive property of convolution, a parallel Lombination L>f LTI system.s clld he replaced by a single LTI systeln whose unit impulse response is the sum of the individual unit impulse responses in the parallel oombinELtion.

106

Jnear Time- Invariant Systems

Chap. 2

Also, as a consequence of both the commutative and distributive properties, we have

\.^\ln\ + -\2[n]]*h[n] = M\n]*h[n\ + X2W*fi[n\

(2.50)

iind

which simply state that the respon.se of an LTI >yf>ten) to the suin of t^vo inputs must equal
the sum of the responses to these signals individually. As illustrated in the next exartxple, the distributive property of eonvolutictn tan also
he exploited to break a complicated convalution into several simpler ones.
Example 2.10
Let y[n] denote ihe ccnvulu(jort of (he following (wo sequences.'
(2. 52)

Note that the stN^ueflcc x[n\ is nonzero jilong the entire time axis-. Direct evalu&(ion ftf
such a L'onvoltiliun is ^omewhat tedious. Instead, we rciAy use the Ji.^trihudve pri.perty lo
express >in) as the suinofthc resuhsof two simpler cnnvoluiion prflhiemi. InpmiLcubr
ifwckt tihJ = (\/2)''uin]audx^_[ti] - 2''w[-rtJ, it follo^^s that

yM - i^i\_r\+x-An])*h[fil

(2.54)

I_fsing tht distnbulive property of tonvolation, we may rewrite eq, {2..^4) as

whete

+ >I"J -- >'il"l

>^J['*J-

y\\n] = jc,[n]*h[n]

(2.55)

iind

Th¨ convolution in eq. ^2.56) fcjr ,V|[rtJ can be obtained from E^ampk' 2.3 (with a =
1/2). while ^'ilnj was evaluated in Ejtample 2.?. TTieir bUtn is y|nj. which if showTi iti
Figure 2.24.

*ff
3'

1

2

-.-.3Jl-2-101234567 n

Be Figure 2.2*

- Sig;ial y[n\

x[n] * ftin\ for Exarnple 2.10.

Sflc 2.3

Propertiesof Linear Tlme-lnvafSant Systems

107

2,3,3 The Associative Property
Another important and useful pioperty of convolulion is that it is cssaciative. That is. in
discrete time

and in contmuouit time

This property is proven by straightforward manipulations of the summations and integrals involved. Exaitiples verifying it are given in Probfem 2.43,
As i ccjoscquence of the associative |>ropeirtj, the expressions

and

yit) - xit)*h:iO*h2ii)

(2.61)

are iinambiguoiVis. That is, accor<fing to eqs. (2.58) and (2.59), it does not matter jn which
order we cotivolve these signals.
An interpretation of the associative property is illustrated for discrece-tiine systems
in Figures 2.25(a) and (b). It> Figure 2.25(a),

= y{n\

v^[ti\ * hjin]

= U\_n\*hi[n])*h2\n].

Jn Figure 2.25cb),

- y[ri]

jf{n] * h[n]

= x{n\*ihx[n]*h2[n]).

According to the associative propeny, the series intereonnection of the rwo systems in Figure 2.25(a) IS equivalent to the single system in Figure 2,25(b), This can be general ieeti CO ati arbitrary number of LTL systems in cascade, and the analogous interpretation and condusicm also hold in continuous time.
By using ttie commutative property together with the associative property, we find
another very important property of LTl systems. Specifically, from Figures 2.25(a) and
Èb), we can conclude that the impulse response of the cascade of two LTI systems Ls the convolution of their iitdividual impulse responses. Since convolution is commutative, we
can compute this convolution of /ii[h] and/i2[n] in either order Thus. Figures 2,2fi(b)and (c) are equivalent, and from the ^^sociitive property, these are in turn equivaieivt to the
.system of Figure 2,2-'5[d), which we note is a cascade combination of two system!?^ in
Figure 2.25(a), but with the order af the cascade reversed. Consequently, the unit impulse response of a cascade of two LTE systems does not depend on the order in which they are
cascaded. In fact, tfiis holds for an arbitrary number of LTI systeitis in cascade: The order in which they are cascaded does not matter as far as the overall system impulse response is concerned. The sanie conclusions hold in continuous time as welJ.

IDS
x[nj

^ h.(n]

w[nj

hJnj

{a)

Linear Time-fnvariant SystcTis

Chap. 2

>- y[n]

x[nl

h(n] = hi[n].h2(n]
{t>)

* y[fi]

x[nj

= h(n] hjfn] * hi [n]
(c)

+- y[nl

m-

h,[n]

hiM
(d)

*- yln]

Figure 2.2S ^ssociadve pr{>p¨rty Df
convoiuUo^ and tlie implication of this and :tie corrmutalive property tor the series interconnection of LTI &y$tem&-

b -- Tt important to emphasize that the behavior of LTI systetns in cascade and, in
particular, the fact that the overall system response daes not depend upyn the order of the systeir.s in the capcade^-is very f>pecial to such systems. In contrast^ the order In which nonhnear systems are cascaded cannot be changed, in general, without changing the over-
all response. For instance, if we have two memoryless systems, one being multiphcation hy 2 and the other squaring the input, then if we multiply tirst and square second, we obtain
y[n] = 4j^[fi],
Huwever, if we multiply by 2 after ^qa^ng, we have
y[n] =- 2j^[nl
Thus, being able to interchange the order of systems in a cascade i.s a characteristic par-
ticular to LTI systems. In fact, as shown in Problem 2.51, wc need both hnearity tind tinie
invariance in order for this property to be true in general.

2.3,4 LTI Systems with and without Memory
As specified in Section L6.1, a system is memoryless if its output at any time depends only on the value of the input at that same time. From eq, (2.39), we see that the only
way thanhiscanbetmeforadiscretC'timeLTIsystemisif jii[nl ^ Ofowt ?^ 0, In this case

.

Sec. 2.3

Proparties of Linear Tlme'ln variant Systems

1 09

the impulse response has the form

h[n] = Ka[nl
K where - ftlQ] is ^ constant, and the convrlution sura reduces to the relation

(2.62)

y[n] - Kx[nl

(2.63)

If a dLScrete-time LTI system has an impulse response k{n] that is nt>t identically zero for
n ^ Ot then the system has memory. An example of an LTI iysteiD with memory is the
system given by eq, (2.42). The impulse response for this system, given in eq. (2.41), is nonzero for ¨ = 1
From eq. (2.40), we can deduce similar properties for continuous-time LTI systems with and without memory. In particular, a continuous-time LTI system h memoryless if hit) = Qior i ^ 0, and such a m^moryless LTI system has the form

v(f) = Kx(t}

(2.64)

for some constant A' and has the impulse response

hit) - Kd(tX

(2.65)

^Note that if AT = 1 in eqs. (2,62) and (2.65), then these systems become identity systems, with output equal to the input and with unit impulse response equal to the unit impulse. In this case, the convolution sum and integral formulas imply that

x[n] = x]n] * Sirt]

and

which reduce to the sifting properties of the discrete-time and ctsntinuou>-time unit im-
pulses:

^ 4fl] =

x[k]S[£ ~ k]

= x(T)

i x{r)^{t - T)dr.

2.3.5 Invertibility of LH Sy^teiDE

Consider a contiTiuous^ me LTI system with impulw response fi(l).Ba.s&J od the discus-

sion in Secdon L6.2. diis system is invertible only if an inverse system exists that, when

connected in series with the original syiitem, produces an output equal to the input to the

first system. Furthermore, if an LTI system is invertihle, then it has an LTI inverse. (See

We Problem 2.50.) Therefore, \sq have the picture shown in Figure 2.26.

are given a sys-

-- tem widi impulse response hit). The inverse system, with impulse response fti(/), results
in w{r) = x{t) such that the series interconnection in Figure 2.26<a> is identical to the

110

Linear TiTie-lnvafiant Systems

Chap. 2

m

y(D

hiCt)

* W(t) = K(t)

ai

x(t)'

Identity systeir
fb)

--^(t)

Figure Z.26 Concept Of an in^r3¨
system for contmuous-tifne LTI systems. The system with impulse response fti(f) is the (nverse of ttia systam wittt Impulse response f^t] M

identity system in Figure 2.26(b), Since the overall impulse response in Figure 2,26<a) is hiO*' h\{t),V/Ci have the condition that k^(t) must satisfy fnrit to be the impulse response of the inverse system, namely.

h{t)*hi{0 = 6(0.

(2.66£

Similarly, in discrete time, the impulse response hi[n] of the inverse system for an LTI system with impulse response k[n] must satisfy

h[n]*h\[n] = d{nl

(2.671

The following two examples illustrate Invertibility and the construction of an inverse
system.

Example 2, 1 f

ConvidcT the LTi lystem consisting of a pure nme shifi

= y(0

- xii fy>.

(2.6S)

> > Such a system is a delay if ff, f^ and an advance iftiy < t>. Fyr example, if fo 0. then
(he Duipui at time i equals the value of the input at theeariiei lime t - to. If ro - 0. the system in tq. <2.68> in the idcnlity syitcm and thui. is memoryless. For any other vaJuc
m of ^fl, thi^ systetn Uh^ memory, it jesponds to the value of the jnpui at a time other than
the i;urrcni time,
Tht impulse response for the system can be ohtained from eq. {2.6&) by Caking the
inpul equal to È(/), i.e..

h{i) = 5{t - tnl

(2.69)

Therefore.

- = xit Jo)

x{i) * B(f - ryj.

(2.70)

That is, the convolutioD of a signal with a shifted impulse simply shifts the signal. To recover the input from the output, i.e., to invert the system, all that is required is
to shift the output back. Thci system with this compensating time shift is then the inverse

K

1

Sec. 2.3

Properties of Linear Time-Inwar imt Systems

11

^ysitern. That is. jf we Lake

then
/t(f)*/ti(0 - Sit -lit)* Sit + ro)- S{t).
SimLUrly, a pure dme shift in dis{:iete lime has the unit Lmpulse response d[n - no]£ so that convolving a signal wkh a shifted impulse is the same as shifdng ttie sigual.
-- Furtheimofe, the inverse of the LTl system with impulse ncsponse 6[it -- /jn] is the LTT
system that shifts the signal in the opposite direction by itie same ai^ioum i.e , the LTl system with impulse r&sponse &[n + u^].
Exainpfe2.f2
Comiider an LTl system with impulse resjwose

Dicing the convolutiDn sum, we can calculate the respon^^! of this system t£ an arhitrary
input:

k=--

< ^ - Since u[n - A *] i* for ?i

and i for n - k Q, eq. (2.72) becaraes

V - >|rt]

x[k].

(2.73)

That is, this system* which we first etK;DUDtered in Section L6.] Isee eq. (1.92)1. is a summer or accumulator that computes the ninnin^ sum of alt the values of the input up to the present time. A& we saw in Section L6r2, such a system is in^nertiWe, and its
inverse, as given hy eq, (L99), is

v[nl = x[n]- ;c[n- l],

(174)

whith is simply njirst difference operation. Choosing jlnl = 6ln], we find that the impul^ response of the inverst system is

h\\n^ - 5[n] - 6[n- I].

(2.75)

As a check that h[n] hi eq. (2.71) and h^[n] in eq. (2,75) arc indeed the impulse re-
sponses of LTl systems that aire inverses of each other, we can verify eq. (2.67) hy direct
calculation:

h[n]*hi\K\ = u[n]*{Sin]-Sln - 1]} ^ u[n] * S[n\ - u[n] *S[n - 1} = H[nl -- u[n -- 11
= 5[n].

(176)

1

.

12

Linear Tims- Invariairt Systems

Chap. 2

23.6 Causality for LTI Systems

Tn Section 1 6.3, we tt\troduHMd the property of causality: The output of a causal system depends only on the present and past values of the input to the system. By using the con-

volution sum and mtegral* we can relate this property Vft a corresponthng property of the

impulse response of an LTI ^ystetti. Specifically, in order for a discrete-time LTI system ro

k> be causal, y{Tt] must not depend on x[k] fi>r

n. From eq, ^2.!i9), ive see that for this in

> mu be true, al 1 of the cue Oi cj en tsh[n- k] that multi ply values of jc[ k] for k n

st be zero

This then requites ihat the impulse rcspotise of a causal diserete-time LTI system satisfy

the condition

h[n] -

forrt <0.

(2.77)

According to eq. (277), the impulse response of a causal LTI system rausi be zero before

the impulse occurs, which is consistent with the intuitive concept af causality. Mote gener-

ally, as shown in Problem 1 .44, causaJity for a linear system is equivalent to the condition

of mitiul rest. i,e,, if the input to a causal system is up to some poir^t in Lime, then the

output must also he up to that time. It is impiJitam to emphasize that the equivalence

of causality and tl^ condition of initial rest applies only to linear systems. For example,

a^ discus.sed in Section 1.6.6. ihe system ylrt) = 2xn\ -h 3 is not linear. However, it is

On causal and, in fact, memfjryless.

-- the other hand, if x\n\

0, y[n\ - 5 =?^ 0, so it does

not satisfy the CDnditioti of initial rest.

V-jt a causal discrete- time T^TI system, the condition in eq. (2.77> implies that the

convolution f,um representation in eq. (2.39) bectinies

^n

y[n] =

x[k]h\n - kl

(2.78)

and the alterviative equivalent form, tq. (2.43>, becomes
y[n\ = ^h[kMn - k].

(2.7'?)

Similarly^ a ci>nQnnous-iime LTI system is causal if

<a h(0 =

for^

and in this case the cotivolution integral is given by

a BO)

y{t) =

X{T)h{t - t)dT =

j:

h(T)x{f - T)dT.

i2.%V\

Both the accumulator (/j^frj = u[n [> and iLs inverse (A In] -- 6[/i, - d\n - 1}), de-

scribed in Example 2.1 2, satisfy eq. (2.77) and therefore are causal The pure time shift

= with impulse respon se ft(0

^(r -- fo) is causal for f^ ^ (when the tin's shift is a delay P,

^ but i^ noncau&al for ^o

(in which case the time shift is an advance, so that the output

anticipates fjture values tif the input!.

3,

Sec. 2.3

Properttes of Linear Time-lrva riant Systems

11

Finally, while causality is a property of systems, it is common terminaiogy to refer to

< < a signal as being causal if it is zero for n

or / 0. The motivation for thisS terminology

comes from eq&. (2.77) and (2,80)' Causajily of an LTI system is equivalent to its impulse

response being a causal signal.

2,3.7 Stability for LTI Systems
Recall from Section 1.6.4 chat a system is siabh if every bountted input produces a bounded output. In order to determine conditions under which LTI systems are stable, consider an input x[n] that is Ixmnded in magnitude;

x{ri\\<.B for all n.

(2.S2)

Suppose that we apply this input to an LTI system with unit impulse response h\n]. Then, using the convolution sum, we obtain an expression for the magnitude of the output'

^ - |>Tn]|

h[k\xin - k\

= --
y.

(2.83)

Since the magnitude of the sum of a set of numbers is no larger than the sum of the mag-
nitudes of the numbers, it follows firom eq, (2 83) that

^ ^ \yVn]\

Hk\\\x[n - k]l

(2,34)

B From eq, (2,82), \x[n - k]\< for all values of A; and n. Together with eq, (2.84), this
implies that

^ ^ \y[n]\

B

\h[k]\

it--*

for all n.

(2.35)

From eq . ( 2 .85 ) , we can conclude that if ^e impulse response is absolutely summable
that is, if

then y[n] is bounded in magnitude, and hence, the system is stable. Therefore, eq. (2.86) is a sufficient condition to guarantee the stability of a discrtte-time LTI system In fact, this condition is also a necessary condition, since, as shown in Problem 2.49, if eq. (2.86) is not satisfied, there are hounded inputs that result in unbounded tjutputs. Thus, the stability of a discrete-tinae LTI system is completely equivalent to eq. (2.86).
In continuous time, we obtain an analogous characterization of stability in terms of < the impulse response of an LTI system. Specifically, if \x{t)\ B for all (, then, in analogy
with eqs, (2.83>-(2.85), it follows that

4

11

Linear Ttme-lrivariant Systeins

Chap. 2

!-£
- |y(01 - Ij h(T)x(t T}dT
--£

4- a:

^

\h(T]\\x{f - T}\dT

I

Therefore, the system i& stable if the impulse response is absolutely inte^rahle^ i.e., if

lhiT)\dT < ^.

(2.87)

As in discrete tinier if ^- (2.S7) is not sa(isiied> there are hounded inputs that produce
unbounded outputs; therefore, the j^tabiLity of a coatinuou&tinie LTl system is equiveilcm to eq. (2,87), The use of eqs (2.8^) and (2.87) to test for stability is illustrated in the next two examples.

ExampFc 2.T3

Cortsider a system th^it is a pure time shift in cither continuous time -or discrete lime Then, in discrete time

+-

*>

^ V - \h\nS\

- \rAn n^W -- \,

am)

while in ountinuo-us time

'

- " h{T)\dT

- '
' |6(T

u,)\dr = \,

I

I

m {2

and we conclude that both of these systems are stable. This should nut be suiprisjng,
since If a sigilidis bounded in magnitude, so is any time-shifted version of that ^i^nal.
m Now consider the accumulator descnbed Example 2.12. As we discussed in
Section 1 .6-4, thii is an unst^Le system, sioce, if wc apply a constant input to an accu-
mulator, the output gruws without bound. That this .system is unstable ci^i\ also he seen
ftom the fact that its impulse lespense u[n\ is not absoJutely summahle:

n = --T

- n [>

Similarly, consider the integrator, the evntinuous-time counterpart of the accumu-
lator:

This is an unstahle system for precisely the same reason as that give^n for the accumulator, I.e., aconstant ijiput gives ri&c to an otitput ihat giows without bound The impulse

5

Sec, 2.3

Propelies of Linear Time-lnvanant Systems

11

lespoDse for the int^^grutoi cad b¨ found by Letting xit) ^ 8(0. in which ca¨e
WO = S(7UiT = u(/) I

and

|uCt)J(^t =

dT = <^.

SiDce the impulse response is not absolutely integrabl^n 0)e system i£ tiot stable.

2.3.8 The Unit Step Response of an LTI System

Up to now, we have seen that the representation of an LTT system in terms of it^ unit

impulse response allows us to obtain very explicit chaiacterizations of system properties.

Specifically, since h\n\ or hit) carnpletcly determines the behavior of an LTI system, we

have been able to relate system properties such as stability and causality to properties of

the impuli^ response.

There is another signal th^t is also used quite often in describing the behavior of

LTr systeiDs; the unit step response, s{n\ or s{t\ ootnesponding to the output when x[n\ =

We u[n] Q(r x(t) " w(0^

will find it useful on occasioti to refer to the step response* and

therefore, it is worthwhile relating it to the impulse response. From the convolution -sum

representation, the stq> re^jonse of a discrete-time LTI system is the corvolution of the

unit step with the impulse response; that is,

= j[n] i4[n]*h{n].
However, by the commutative property of convolution^ s[n] -- h[n] ñ w[n], and therefore,
s[n] can be viewed as the response to the input /t(nl of a discrete-time LTI system with
unit impulse response u[n]. As we have seen in Example 2.12, u[n] is the unit impulse
response of the accumulator. Therefore,

^ = s\tt]

It
h[kl

(2.91)

From this equation and from Example 2 12, it is clear that h[n] c^n be recovered from s[n]
using the leiatioTi

h[n] = s{n]-s[n- 1].

(2.92)

That is, the step response of a discrete-time LTT system is the running sum of its impulse
response [eq. (2.91 )L Conversely* the impolse response of a discrete-dme LTI system is die first difference of its step response [eq. (2,92)1,
Similarly, in continuous time, the step response of an LTI system with impulse re-
= spon'ie h(0 is given by sit) u(t) * h't), v/hich also equals the response of an integra-
tor [with impulse response w(r)l to the input hit). Thac is, the unit step response of a continuous-time LTI system is the running integral of its impulse response, or

j(0 =

k{T)<iT,

i:

(2.93)

6 T f

Lmear Time-lnvananl Systems

Chap. 2

and from eq, (2.93), the unit impiii>ie response is tKe first derivative of the unit step re-
s.pon*¨i^^ or

-'^= Hit) =

s'ir).

(2.94)

Therefore, in both tontinuims and discrete lime^ the unit step response c^in also he used tu
characterize an LTI system, since we can calculate the unit impulse resiponse from it. In Prohlem 2.4,"^, expressions analogous to the corvolutjon sum and convolutioQ integral are
derived for the representations of an LTI system \n leTiris of its unit step resptu^se.

2.4 CAUSAL LTI SYSTEMS DESCRtBEO BY OfFFERElNfTlAL
AND DfFFERENCH EQUATIONS

An extremely important class of continue us -time sy^iems is that for which [he input and

otilput are related through a Ihti'ar comtani-coejficient differential equanon liquations of

this type arise in the Jescription of a wide variety of systems and physical phenomena. For

RC example, as we iUustrattd in Chapter 1 , the response iif thÈ

circuit in Figure 1 , 1 and

the motion of a vehicle subject to acceleration inputs and fnctional fortes, as depicted in

Figure L2, can both be described through linear constant-coefficient differential equations.

Similar differential equations arise in the description tif mechanical systems c:{)ntaining

restoring and damping forces, in the kinetics of chemical reactions, and in many other

contexts as veil.

Correspondingly^ an important class of discrete-time sy.stems is that for which the input and output are related through a lineat constant-Cifefficient difference! equation. Equa-
tions of this type are used to describe the sequential behavior of many different processes. For instance, in Example 1.10 we saw how difference equations arise in describing the accumulation of savings in a bank account, and in Example l.U we saw how they can

be used to describe a digital simulation of a continuous -time system described by a dif-

ferential equation. Difference equations also arise qu^te frequently in the specification of

discrete-time systems designed to perform particular operations on the input signal F<ir
m e\ai.iple> the system that calculates the diiTerence between successive input \alues, as
eq, (1.99), and the system described by eq. i 1 .104) that computes the average value of the input over an interval are described by difference equations.

Througliout this book, there will be many occasions in which we will consider and
examine systems described by linear constant-coefficient differential and difference equa-
tions. In this section we take a tirst look at these systems tc* introduce some of the basic

ideas involved in solving differential and difference equations and to uncover and explore
some of the properties of systems described by such equations. Jn subsequent chapters, we
develop additional tools for the analysis i>f signals and systems that will add considerably

btJth to our ability to analyze systems described by such equations and to our understanding ot their characteristics and behavior.

'Thr<JUEhn.ut this book, wf^itl use both The riolaUwK nwiicated in sq. (2."^4M<h tl^fifite iirsi derivatives AiuJogOUi not^ltion \^'illa]su be used for hi_gherdcn>rtlives.

Sec, 2.4

Causdi LTI Systems Oesclbed hf Dif^efential and Difference Equations

iJi

2.4.1 Unea r Con stant-Coeffi cient DifferentiaJ Eq uation^
To introduce some of the important ideas concerning systems specilied by linear constant-
coefficient differential equations, let usconsiHec a first-order differential equation as in eq. (1.85), viK.

-^^- -H 2y(0 = xisX

(2.95)

where yir') denotes the output of ihe system and jf(r) is the input. For example, comparing
eq, (2,y5) to the differential equation (1,B4) for the velocity of a vehicle subject to applied
and frictinnal forces, we see that eq. (2.95) would correspond exactly to this system if
y(0 were identi^ed wilh the vehicle's velocicy v'(r), if jc(f) were taJien as the applied force
m /(r), and if the parameters in eq. (1.84) were normalized uniL*; such that bltn = 2 and
1/m = I.
A very imp^nant point abom differential equations such an eq. (2.95) is. that they
provide an implii.it specificatian of the system. That is, they describe a relationship between the input and the output, rather than an e?(plicit ej^pression for the system output
as a function of the input. Jti order to obtain an e?tplicit expression, we must solve the differeniiaJ equation. To firid a solution, we need more information than that pnjvided by
the differential equation alone. Fur example, to determine the speed of an automobile at
the end of a 10-second interval when it has been subjected to a constant acceleration of I m^sec^ for 10 seconds, we would also need to >:jiow how fasi the vehicle was moving at the jwrr of the intervaL Similarly, if we are lold that a constant source voltage of I volt is applied to the /?C circuit in Figure 1.1 for 10 seconds, we cannot determine what the capacitor voltage is at the end of that interval without also knowing what the initial capacitor
voltage is.
More generally, to solve a differential equation, we must specify one or iiMire auxiliary conditions, and once these are specified, we can then, in principle, obtain an explicit
expression for the output in termsof the input, fn other words, a differential equation such as eq. (2.95) describes a constraint between the input and thtf output of a system, but to
characterize the system completely, we must also specify auxiliary conditions. Different
choices for these auxiliary conditions then lead to different relationships between the in-
put and tht output. Fcr the most part£ in this book we will focus on the use of differentia]
equations to describe causal LTI systems, and for such systems the auxiliary conditions take a particular, simple form. To illustrate this and to uncover some of the basic properties of the solutions to differential equations^ let us take a look at the solution of eq. (2.Q5) for a specific input %ignat ;t(/)/

-Our diiCUSSLun of Uie ioluion h->f .inear constant-totflicteiit difTcrential equattons ts bnel, since -^^ ai-

^Utnethat the reailcr ha^ some lan]lianty ^nththiimidtenat Fof review, wt rttommend a text nn the ^oli^tion iif

B G ordi niry difTcrcniial cqiiat] ons., such as Ordnuiry Jyijftrenttal Equatiofis f^ird ed. >, by G

irkhufT ard

. -C Roia .

^^^c^v York John Wiley artJ Sons, 1^78), or EUineriiary IhJlerentvAl Eiiua^ions (3rd cd >, by W.E Bniyct atid
C K ChPnma (New York: John Wiley ajid Suni, 1^11). TTicre irc also numerous tests Jhat diacuts diflcruniial

cquiiLions ftl the comtcxt lit tircuit Ihcury See, fcr example, Btaic Cirtuii Theory, b; L.O. CMja, C.,\. f^es<>cr,
m aJid E.S Kin (Nciv. YrtrV' McGraw-Hill Book Compajjy, 1^87] As m^nhuncd ill (he tcM, [he following

*;hapters we prcient uUicr very useful metKods tor solving liticar ddlcrcntial eciuauons that ^\i\ be sutlicicrit for

our purpow:v fn addiLton, a lnJtll^e1 ut" exercises involving the Solution of differentia] cqiiatir>ns are included tn

ihc pr.iblems *n the tcid of Ihc chapter.

Tie

Linear Time tnyariantSysteii^s

Chap 2

ExampJe 2.T4

Consider the solution of ec[. (2,95) when the input signal li

x{t) -= Ke'"i{{n,

(2.965

^ where js ii real niirnbeir
The complete solution to cq. (2,96) ctinsi^ts of tht sum ofiiptirtiLulaF- soiuru?^. Vpi^K and a homogeneous solKtion, ic, >'ji(f ),

where the partkular solution satisfies eq. (2.95) and >^(/) is a solution of d>e homo_ge-

neous differentiiil equation

^ + 2>C0 ^ 0.

a.98)

A common nw-thod for Hndiog the particular solution for an eiiponential input signal as
-- in eq, (2.96J i^ to look for a ^a-aUsd forced response i.e.. a signal yf the same form

= > jas (he input. With regard to eq. <2.95>. since x(i)

Ke^' for r 0, we hypothesize a

> solution for r

of tht fomi

Mr) = J'e".

^.2.99j

where y it a nuEnber thai wc muiit detemiitke. Substituting eqs. (2,96) and (^2.^9) into eq. (2.95) for t > yields

^Yt^' ^ 2Ve-' = Ke^'.

(2 100)

Carcelln^ d>e factor e-' from both sides of cq. (2.100), ivc obtain

^y + 2Y = K.

[2.100

or

y ^ ^.

(2jn2)

so that

- >V(i) je^\ r >0

i2,l03)

Tn order to determine VhiO, w-e hypothesize a solution of the iorm
y^(0 = Ae".

i2.l04)

SubstitutJQg this into e*j. f2.93) gives

+ 4jÈ^^' 2Af^^ - Ae^'r.t + 2J - 0.

i2.W5\

From this equation, we see that we jnu5t take .t = --2 and that Ae~^'' is a solution to eq
(2.98J for any choice of A. Utilizing this fact and eq. (2.103) in eq, (2.97). we find that
> the soluticxi of the differerttja] equation foi f Ojs

Sec. 2A

CiLisal LTi Syslems Described by Ditfere^itial and Difference Equations

M9

As not^ earlier, the differentia] equation {2,95) by itself dots not specify uniquely the
A response >(r) to the input xit) in eq, (2.96), In particular, the constant in aq. (2. 1 06)
h^^ i>ot yet been det^rminedH In order for the value o^ A t-6 be detennincd, we need to
w specify an auxiliary conditjoa in addition the differential equation (295), As explored

in Problem 2.34, diffcrcnt clioices for thi* auxiliary conditioD Itad to different solutiotis

yO) and, consequently, to different lebtioiishjps between the input And the output. As

mMt we have indicated, foi the

part in this b&ok -we fcicus on diffeiential and differeiKe

eqiiations used 1o describe s^fiteins chat aie LTI and causal^ and in this caj^e the auxiliary

condition takes the form of thecondition of initial rest That is, as shown in Prtiblem 1.44,

< fora eausal LTI systetu, if xO) -- Ofor t ta^ then y(0 must also equal < for f S\}, From

= < eq. (2,96), we see that for aurexaniplej;(f) Ofor; 0> and thus, ttie condition of initt^

< = rest implies that >(f) = Qfort O.Evalua^ingcq. (2,106) at f

and setting y[0) -

yields

QF
> Thus* for / 0,

^
5

.-2r

{2.1Cr7)

< whiJe for / 0, y</) = 0, because of the condition of initial rest. Cflrabinjng these two cases^ we obtain the full solution

y(r)=

^ ^3r ^-3r uitl

3

{2Am

Exampk 2.14 illustrates seveta] vexy tmporUnt points concerning linear constant-
coefficient differentia) equations and the systems they represent. Firsts the response to
-- an input x(t) will generally consist of the sum of a p^ticular solution to the differential
equation and a homogeneous solution i.e., a solution to the diffcicntia) equation with die input set to zaro. The homogeneous solution is often referred to as the natural response of the system. The nalural responses of sitnple electrical circuits and mechamoal systems are explored in Problems 2.61 and 2.62.
In Example 2.14 we also saw that, in order to determitte completely the relatioo-
ship between the input and the output of a system described by a differential equation
such as eq. (2.95), we must specify auxiliary conditions. An imphcation of this fact,
which is illustrated in Problem 2.34, is that different choices of auxiliary conditions lead to different relationships between the input and the output. As we illustrated in the ex-
ample, for the most part we will use the condition of initial rest for systems described
by differential equations. In the example, since the input was for f < 0. the condition of initial rest implied the initial condition y(0) = 0. As we have slated, and as illustrated in

,

T20

Linear Time-Invariant Systems

Chap, 2

Problem 2.33, under the condition of initial rest th& system described by eq, (2.95) is LTl

and causal.^ For example, if we multiply tKe inpul in eq. (2.96) by 2, the resulting output

would be twice the output ineq. (2.108).

It is important to emphasize that the condition of initial rest does not specify a zero

initial condition at a 6xed point in time, but rather ajjjufits this point in time ^a tha^ the

response is zero until the input becomes nonzero. Thus, if xit) =

^ for t

fo for the

^ causal LTl system described by eq. (2.95), ihen y(r) = for /. fo, and we would use

> the initial condition v(ty) = to solve for the output for / ttj. As a physical example,

consider again the ciicuit in Figure 1.1, also discussed in Example 1 .8. Initial rest for this

example corresponds to the statement that, until we connect a nonzero voltage source to the

cirtuit, the capacitor voltage is zero. Thus, if we begin to use the circuit at noon today, the

mjtial capacitor voltage as we connect the voltage source at noon today is ^ero. Similiiriy,

if we begin to use the circuit at noon tomorrow instead, die initial capacitor voloage a^ we

connect the voliage source at ntxm toniorrow is zero.

This example also provides us with some intuition as to why the condition of LTiitial

rest makes a liystem described by a linear constant -cocftic ient differential eqimtion lime

invariant. For example, if we perform an experiment on the circuit, starting from initial
rest, then, assuitiing that the coefficients R and iTdon^t change over time, we would expect

to ÈCt the same results whether we ran the experiment today or tomorrovv_ That is, if we

perform identical expentncnts on the two days* where tlie circuit starts frojn initial rest at
-- noon on each day, then we would expect to see identical resptmses i.e , responses that

are simply time-shifttjd by one day with respect to each other.
While we have used the first-order differential equation (2.Q5) as the vehicle for the

discussion of these issues^ the same ideas extend directly to systems described by higher
A order differential equations. general Nth-order linear constant-coefficient differential

equation is given by

i=

"*

ii^D

The order refers to the highest derivative of the output v(f) appearing in the equation, [r
= the case when ^f 0, eq, <2, 109) reduces to

In this ca^c, y(t) is an expiicit function of the input x{t) and its derivatives. For .V ^ 1
eq. f2,109) speciiies the output implicitly in terms of the input In thi^ ca^^e, the analysis
-- of the equation proceeds jysi as in our discussion of the first-order differential equation in
Kxainple 2.14. The solution yV) consists of two parts a particular solution to eq {2 109?
-Tn fact, a&]i aliWihoT*n in Prohterr 2-34, if the iniEiaicondinon for eq (2.95Hs l1^>n^e^o. [he- rcsuh]n^
system IS increnieiiLally linear. Thai ii, the overaJI re.;p^niLe can be viewed, much as in Figure 1 4S, a^ ch?
.superposition wt the rciponic to tfie initial condinon^ nlonc fwith input set lo 0) and the respvnst [y ihc input ^i[h an iniua] concition of <i.e.. (he rciponsc of the caudal LTl system dcSt^nbcd by cq. (2 95 i)

Èec. 2A

Caus:al LTl Systems Described by Differential anci Difference Eauations

plus a !;otution to the homogeneous differential equation

1 21

The solutions to this equation are referred to as the natural responses oi the system.

As in the first-order case, the differential equation (2. 1 09) does not ^^ompletely spec ify the output in terms of the input, and we need to identify auxiliary conditions to detcr-

EUTie completely the input-output relationship for die system^ Orice again, different choices

for thene auxiliary condiuons result in differetit Inpuc-ijucput relationships, but for the mo^t

u^ part, in this book we will

the cot^dition t>f initial rest when dealing wLth systems de-

^ ^ scribed by differential equations. That is, if ^{i)

for t ^ /y, we assume that yit) Q

> for t ^tQ, aiid therefore, the response for f /y can be oafcuiated from the differential

equation (2.109) with the initial conditions

^^ --^Y^ y{io^ = dy(W ^= ... ^= d^y(h) - 0.

dt

dr'

12.112)

IMder the condition of inittat rest, the system described by eq. (2.109) is causal and LTL
Given the inittaJ conditit>ns ineq, (2J 12>. the output y(t} can, in principle, be determined by solving the differential equation in the manner used in Example 2.14 and further illus-
trated in several prublenis at the end of the chapter. However, in Chapters 4 and 9 we will develop some tool,*; for the analysis of continuous-time LTI systems that greatly facilitate
the solution of differential equadons and, in paiticular, provide us with powerful methods for analysing and characterizing the properties of systems described by such equations.

2,4.2 Linear Constanc-Ct>efficlent Difference Equations
The discrete-time counterpart of eq, (2.109) is the A'th^jrder linear constant-coefticient
difference equation

f^

At

jt -

k=Q

An equation of this type can be solved in a manner exacUy analogous to that for differential equations, (See Problem 2.32.)^ Specifically, tht solution yin] can be vvritten as the sum
of a particular solution to eq. (2. 113) and a solution to the homogeneous equation

N
^atyin - k] = 0,

(2.1 I4i

^Fof d detailed tteatmcni of the methods f&i ^tvji^ linear con^uiit-coefficLent diflference equuti-ons,
Bcc Finitt Difference EqiuitiOKs, by H. Levy a&d F Lei^^inian (New Yortr MacitkLHun. Inc., 13^1), nr Finite ti^^tvnce Equo:icms and Simuhiions (Enj^wood Cliffs. NJ: Prcntice-tiaU, 1 5^63) b> F. B. Hildebrand. [it CKaptcr t, we prestTit afiother mctho<l for solving difference equations that greutly facihtaie^ the analysiii r>f line^ tjmt^invarianc systems ttar are ?o de^schbed. hi addilion, we refer ttie reader to the fJtobtems at Lhe end
ofjhii chapter that deal with th& salution oF difference ^qtaadons.

1 22

Linear Ttme-lrvatiai^t Systems

Chap. 2

The solutions to this iiomog^neous equation are often referred to as the natural responses

of the system described by eq, (2,113).
Aa in the continuous-time case, eq. (2.113) does not completely specify the output in tejms of the input, lb do this, we must also specify some auxiliary conditions. While

there are many possible choices foi auAiliary conditions, leading to different input-output
-- relationships, we will focus for the nwst part on the condition of initial rest = i.e., if x[n]

< < forn no, then y[n] - Ofor n no as we!L With initial rest, the system described by

un eq. (2. tl 3) is

and causaJ.

Although all of these properties can be developed following an approach that di-

rectly parallels otu" discussion for differential equations, the discrete-time case offers an

alternative path. 'Diis stems from the observation that eq. (2.113) can be rearranged in the

form

--\^ -k]-^ if*'

y[n] -

^k^[rt

^
atyln - k]

j(=0

k=\

(2.U5)

Equation (2.1 15) directly expresses the output at time n in terms of previous values of the
input and output. From this, we can iminediaLely see the need for auxiliary conditions. In order to ca[culabc y[/r]. we need to know y[n-- l],^ .., y[n -- NJ Therefore, if we are gi^^eo
H the input for all n and a set of auxihary condiuons suchas j/[-jV1, y[-N -i- .,.,y[-l],
eq. (2,115) can Ise solved for successive values of y[nj.
An equation of the form of eq, (2,113) oreq. (2.115) is called a r^curjiive equanon,
since it specifies a recursive procedure for determining the output in terms of the input and
previous outputs. In the special case when A^ = 0, eq. (2, 1 1 5) reduces to

y[¨] ^Sf-W^'tJ,

(2.116)

This is the disciete-time counterpart of the continuous-time system given in eq. (2. UO), Here, y[n\ is an explicit function of the present and previous values of the inpul. For this
reason, eq, (2.116) is often called a nonrecursive equation, smce we do not recursively use previously computed values of the output to compute the present value of the output. Therefore, jtist as in the case of the system given in eq. (2.11(5), we do not rteed auxiliary
cunditions in order to determine y{n]. Furlhennore, eq, {2, 11 6) describes an LTl system, and by direct cortiput^tion, the impulse response of this system is fcund ti) be

y 0, otherwise

Thai is, ¨[. (2.116) is nothing more than the convolution sum. Note that the impulse re-

sponse forit has finite duration; that is, it is nonzerti cinly over a finite time interval. Because

of this property, the System specified by eq. (2.116)is often cabled ^finite impulse rej^ponse

{fia) system.

Although we do not require auxiliary conditians for the case of A^ = 0, such condi-

^ tions are needed for the recursive case when A^

1 , To illustrate the solution of such an

equation, and to gain some insight into the behavior and properties of recursive difference

equations, lei us examine the fo\hw\ng simple example:

5 1

Sec. 2.4 Causal LTI Systems Described by Differe^tral and Differe[>ce Equation^

123

Exampte 2. 1
Consider the difference equalion
y[n]-ly[n-l] = x[nl

(2.118)

Eq. (2. 1 ] È) COD also be expressed ia the form

y[n] = x\n] + ^y[n - 1],

{2.119>

highligtititig the fact Uiat we need the previous vidue of the -output, >[n -- U, to calculate
the cxm^nc value. Thus, to begin the recuisLon£ we need an initial cDnditLon. For cTcample, suppose diat we impose the coDditLon of initial icst and consider the
input

x[ti] = KS[nl

a.llOy

lothiscaj^e, sinct x[n} = Oforn ^ - 1, tKecotididon of initial re^timpheji that y[nl ^

^ = for rt

- 1, iu> that we have as an initial condition j[-ll

0. Starting from this

^0 initial condition, we can solve for successive values of y[fj] for n

as follows:

>[01= + ;vlOJ ^y[-l] = K,

(2.1 21

Hl}= ^[l] + ^>'[0] = ^^,

-^I^. + yi2\= j:12J

I ... ^>-[1]

/r=

(2.122.
a-^23)

1

{1\"

Since die sy ^lem specified by eq . (2 . 1 1 8) aiid the condition of initi al rest i s LTI, its mpui-
K output behavior is completely characterized by its imptJse response. Setting - U we
see (hat the impulse response for the Hysiem considered in this example is

'"[fl] = (f^0l""i"i"[n-l

(2.125)

Note that the causal LTI system in Example 2. 15 has an impulse res^pon^ of infinite

^ ^ duration, fn fact, if

1 in eq. (2.1 13), so that the difference equation is recursive^ it

is usually the case that the LTI system corresponding to this equation together with the

condition of initial rest will have an impulse response of infinite duration. Such systems

are commonly referred to as infinite impulse response (ilR) .ryjrirm,?.

As we have indicated, for the most part \ce will use recursive difference equations in

the context of describing and analyzing systems that arc linear, time-invariant, and causaU

and consequently, we will usually make the assumpLion of initiaj rest. In Chapters 5

and 10 we will develop tools foi the analysli of discrete-time systems that will provide us

T24

Linear TimHnv^M^nt Systems

Chap. 2

with very useful antl efficient methods for solving linear corstanl-coefTicient difference equation-^ and for analyzing the properties of the systems tJiat they descrit?c.

2.4.3 BPocfc Diagram Representations of FirstOrder Systems Described by Differentiar sna Difference Equations
An importiint property of systems described by linear cons tant-coeffi dent difference and
differential equations is that they can be represented in very simple and natural ways in terms of block diagram interconnections of elememary opi^rations. Thni is significant
f<>T A nuTvibeT i>f reasons. One is ^hat it pnivides a pictorial representatior ^vhich can add
to our understanding of the behavior and properties nf these systems In addition, such representations can be of considerable value for the simulation or implementation of the
m systems. For example, the block diagram representation to be introduced thjs section
for continuous -time systems is the basis for early analog computer simulations of systems described by differential equations, ai:d It can also be directly translated into a program for the .sjniijlatiiin of such a system on a digital computer. In addition, the corresponding representation for discrete-time difTerenee etjuations suggests simple and efficient ways in vvhich the systems that the equations describe can be implemented in digital hardwarc.
In this section, we illustrate the basic ideas behind these block diagram represcrttEitic}ns
by <£n<ilr(icting them for the cau^^l first-order systems imr<Hiticed in Examples 1 ,ii- Lit.
fn Problems 2.57-2,60 and Chapters 9 and [0£ wt consider block diagryms for systems
described by other, more complex differential and difference equations.
We begin vvith the discrete-time case and. in particular, the causal system described
by the first-order difference equation

y\n] + ay[n 1] = bx[n].

(2.126)

To aevelop a block diagram representation of thts system, note that the evaluation of eq. (2, 126) requires three basic operations: addition, multiplication by a coefficient, and
delay (to capture the relationship between y[n] and y[n - 1]). Thus, let us define three basic network elements, as indicated in Figure 2.2'?, To see how these basic elements can be used to represent the causal system described by eq. (2, 126), we rewrite this eqtiation
in the form that directly suggests a recursive algonthm for computing successive values of the output y\ii\\

y{t^\ = -ay\n- IJ + b^[n].

(2.127)

This algorithm is represented pictonally in Figure 2.28, vvhich is an eJiamp'.e of ^feedback system, since the output is fed back thrtiugh a delay and a muEtiplication by a coefficient
and is ther added to bxlti]. The presence of feedback is a direct consequence of the recur-
sive nature of eq, (2. 1 27),
The block diagram in Figure 2,2S makes clear the required,memory in this sysiem and the consequent need for initial conditions. In particular, adelay corresponds to a mem-
ory dement, a.^ the element must retain the previous value of its input. Thus, the initial
value of this memory element aervejj as a necessaiy initial condition for the recursive calculation specified pictorially in Figure 2.2S and mathematitally in eq. (2J27). Of course, if the system described by eq. (2 126) is initially at rest, the initial value stored in Ehe memory element is zero.

Sec. 2.4 Cau&al LTI Systems Described by Differefitial and Difference Equations

*iH

>t2^]
o
(a)

*- K^[n>+ )tj[ni]

TZ5

x\n]
(b)

axh

x[r|
[>;)
o b
m-

*-x[n-1}

Figure 2.27 Basic elements tor
tile block diagram repre^entatioti of ttie cAusal system described b^ eq. {2A2Sy. (a) an adder, fb) multiplicaticn by a coefficient; {c) a i^nrt
dekay.

*- y[n3
I

yfn-i;

Figure 2.28 Block diagram repre-
sentation for the causal di3crete-lme system described by eq. (2.126).

Consider next ttie causal continuous-time system described by a first order differer
tial equation:

dyiO + iiyit) = bx(ty
dt

(3.128)

As a first attempt at defining a block diagram representation for this system, lei us rewrite

--^ y(t) = -

+ -jr(0.

a dt

a

(2J29)

The right-iiand side of this equation involves three basic operations' addition, multiplica-
ticn by a coefficient, and differentiation. Therefore, if we define the tJiree ba^ic netwtJTk elements indicated in Figure 2 29^ we can consider representing eq. (2.129) as an inter-
connection of these basic elements in a manner analogous to dial used for the discrete-time system described previousiy, resulting in the block diagram of Figure 2 30.
While the Satter figure ib a valid representation of the causal system described by eq. (2.128), it is noi the representation that is most firequently used or the representation
that leads directly to practical implementations, since differenciators are troth difficult to
implement and extremely sensitive ttj errors and noi.se. An alternative imp] erne n tab on tha(

126
"itt)

Linear Tlme-hvartant Sygteni$

Chap 2

*- + Xifl) ^2(1)

X(tJ

aKttJ (b)

x{t).

D

^c)

Figure 2.29 One possible set at
basic slemsnts for tl>e block drapram representation of the contirLous-time systam descntwd by eq, (2.128). {a) an add^r; [b) miJtipJication by ^ cofltffci&nt; (c) a differentiator.

b/a

*- m

1/a
eft

FJgure 2,30 Block diagram
representation for th^ sy$tefn in eqs- (2.128) avid <2.'l29), using adders, multiplications by coefficients, an^ differentiators.

is much more widely used can be ol>tained by first rewriting eq. (2-12S) as

(2.130) Jf

-¨ and then integrating from

to r SpecificaJly, if we assume that the system described by

eq. (2.130) is initially at rest, then the integral of dy<t)fdt from -¨= to ^ is precisely y(i)

(since the value of ><- £) is zero). Consequently, we obtain the equation

yiO =

[bxir) - 3y(T): dr.

I

(2.131)

In this fonrij our syscem can be implemented using the adder and coefficient multiplier
J indicated in Figure 2.29, together with an imegraior, as defined in Figure 2 L. Figure 2 32
is a block: diagram represcRtation for this system using these dements.

--

Sec. 2,5

Singiilarity Functions

1Z7

5t{ll

f^i: *t(')dT

Figure 2. 3T PictDrial representation

Of an rntegrator.

/

*- y{t)

Figure 2.32 Block diagram re^-

reaentation foMhe s/stem in eqs

(2 128) and (2.131), using adders,

-a

multiplications by cnefficientSH and in-

tegrators.

Since integrators can t>e readily implemented using operational amplifiers, rcpreE^entatiuns inicb an tliat in Figure 2.32 lead direx^tl^ to analog iinplementatLon<;, and indeed,
this is ttie basis tor both early analog computers and modem analog computation systems.
Note that in the continuous-time case it is the integrator that represents the memory storage element of the system. This is perhaps more readily seen if we consider integrating
eq. (2. 1 30) from a finitt point in time fn£ resulting in the expression

y<0 = v<fo) + - \f>x(7j ayiT)\ dr.
hi,

(2.132)

Equation {2A32) makc^ dear the fact that ttie specification of v(0 requires an initial con-
dition, namely, the value of yita). It is precisely this value that the inLegrcit<)r stores at time tn .
While we have illustrated block diagram constructions only for the simplest firstorder differential and difference equations, such block diagrams c;an also be developed for
higher order systems, providing both valuable intuition for and possible implementations of these systems. Examples of block diagrams for higher order systems can be found in Problems 2.58 and 2.60.

2.5 SINGULARITY FUNCTIONS
m In this section, we take another look at the continuous-time unit impulse function order
to gain additional incuitions about this important idealized signal and to introduce a set of
related signals known coUectively as singularity functions. In particular, in Section 1 .4.2 we suggested Q^at a continuous-time unit impulse could be viewed as the idealization of a pulse that is '*short enough" so that its shape and duration is of no practic^il consequence i.e., so that as far as the response of any particular LTI system is concerned, all of the area
under the pulse can be thought of as having been applied instantaneously. In this section,
we would first like to provide a concrete example of what this means and then use the
interpretation embodied vwthin the exatnple to show that the key to ihe use of unit im pulses
m and other singularity functions is the specification of how LTT systems respond to these
idealijKd signals; i.e., the signals are in essence defined in terms of how ihey behave under
convolution with other siignals.

izs

Linear Tinae-mvariam Systems

Chap 2

2.5. 1 The Unit Impulse as an Idealized Short Pvise
From the sifting property, eq. (2.27), the unit impulse ^(0 is the impulse response of the
identity system. That is,

we = for any sifirial jftO- Therefore, if

tike j[:(0

5(f), \^e have

6(0 - S(f)*6if).

(2J34)

Et]uatit]ii (2.1 34) is a basi^ property of the unit impulse, and U also has a sigmhcam ini-
plication for out intcrpretati£i\ ¨f the unit impulse a^s an idealized pulse. For example, as
A in Section 1 2, suppose that wc think of S(t) as the limiting ftirm of a rettajiguliir pulse.
Specifically, let S^ (i> oorres^pond to the rectangular pulse dehned in Figure 1 .34, and let

rAiO = ^A(n^SA(/)

(2. 135)

A -- Then rA(f) !-'> as sketched in Figure 233. If we wish to interpret S(0 as the limitas

* nf

^ 5A(0.then,byvirtucofeq.(2.i34),thelirniiasA

for r^u) must also be a unit impulse

A In a similar manner, we can argue that the limits as -+ of rsU) * r^(T) or r^it) ^S\(t)

must be unit impulses, and so on. Thus^ we see that for consistency, if we define the unit

impulse as the limiting form of sotue signal then in fact, there is an unlimited number of

veiy dis,siTnilar-lc>cikjng signals, all of which behave like an impulse in the limit.

The key word.s in the preceding paragraph are "behave like an impulse," where, as
we have indicated, what \;e mean by this is that the response of an LTl system to jU of

these signals isessentiaJly identical, as longas the pulse is '*short enough," i.e., A is 'small

enough.*' The following example illush-ates this idea:

Figure 2.33 The sJgnal f:,{t) 2i
defined in eq. [2.135).

Exampfe 2.f 6

Consider the LTE system descTitied by the first-order differential equation
^- -t2y(i) = K(tl

(2A36)

together with the conditionof initial rest. Figure 2.:34 depietip the tesporise of this system

to ^ji.(')' fjiO>- ^JiU) * ^jlU). and r^U) * r^it) for several valuc-s f>f A. For i laige ffnuugh,

the responsea to ihese itiput Mgfiali differ nouceabiy. However, for i sufficicnlly imall,

the responses are t^scntiaJly indistinguishable, so that all of the input signals "behave"

in the tame way. Fuithermoret as suggested by the figure, the limiting form of all of these

^ respon^es is precisely e~^u(t^ Sirtce the Utrit of each of these FLignaH as. i

it, ihe

unit impulse, we conclude that f '^u(_t) is the impulse response for this system.''

^In Chapters 4 and ^, wt; ftill dcscntK mjch simpler ways to cieccmiiDc the impulse response of c^js^l LT[ ^ly^terrf^ ?i*:jCntcd by hncar trtntUiTiH-<;oe.fii(nertT differential cjqualion^

Sec. 2 5

Singulsrity Functions

}29

2

a

1

i-0.00P3

-0S&

= Responses lo K(t) !i-j.(t>-rjf}

^u h(t} - e

il)

05

Figure 2.34 InterpretaLion of ci unit impLiise as tha idealizatjon of a pulse

whose djratisn i$ "short enough' so that, a& far as ihe response 5f an LTI

system to this pulse is concerned, the pulse can be thought of as having

been applied mstantaneou^ty: (a) responses o1 the causal LTI syslem de-

^M \nm scribed by eq. (2.136) to the

fOf ^ = O-^S, O.l, and 0.OO25.

{b) responses of the same system to fi[f) for the same values of A; (c) re-

sponses to ^tO*Ji{0; {^) responses 10 rj,it]* fill): {r]\\'& impulse response

A = h{t) = e~'^'ii{t] for the system. Note that, for

0.25, ttiere are noticeable

differences among the responses to these different sgnals; howeiver, as i

becomes smaller, the differences dimtnish, and all of the responses con^^erge

lo ttie impulse response shown in (&).

130

Linear Time TnvarlantSyslefins

Chap. 2

One important pomt to he emphasized is that what we mean by "A small enough"

de[M:r>ds on the pamcul^ir LTI syMcm lo which the preoeding pulses are applied. For

we example, in Figurfi 2 -1.^-,

Kavo illa.'^TTHled tht responses to thef.e puUeij fV:T difftreini

f)5 -

Responses to fiX) - fjU?
A-O.0W?5 ^-0 025

D1

3

1

02

Resporsseslo xjt} = 1^(1)^^(1)

1

h(f) - e ^'^u (0

Figure 2.35 Fining a vaiue of i that iÈ "small enough" depends upon

the system to ^whichi^e are applying inputs: (a) respcnses cf the causal U\

system described by eq. (2 137} Id the fnput 3M) tor A - 0.025, 01, and

00025; (tj) responses lo r^{l)\ (c) responses to Sj(r)*yi(f): (d) responses to

^M = * -'At)- (b) the impulse response fnt)

e ^¯^it{t) for the system. Com-

paring these responses to ttiose in Figure 2.3A, we see that we need to use a
A smaller value of in ttijs case belore the duration and shape of the pulse are

cf rro coriset^uence.

Sec. 2.5

Singularity Functions

131

values of A for the causal LTI system descnbed by the fir^J-order differentia] equation

dy{tt + 20y<f) = xit\
dt

(1137)

Pk& seen In Ihc figure, we need a smaller value of A ld this case in order for the responses to be indistmguiij^hable from each other and from the impulse response hi.f\ = ^ '^^u(t) for the system. Thus, while ^hal we mean by "A small -enough" Lb different foe these two systeiTE. we can find values rtf A s-mall enough for both. The unit impulse i*. then
the idealization of a short pulse whose duration is short enough for alf systems.

2.5.2 Defining the Unit Impulse throu^ Convolution

As th& preceding example illusirates, for ^ smiJl enough, the signals S^(i), r\{t\ ri(0 +
d^{t), and rj<r) + taU) all act lite itnpalses when applied to an LTI system. In fact, there are many other signals for which this is true as well. What it suggests is that we should think of a unit impulse in terms of how an LT! system responds to it. While usually a function or signal is defined by what it is at each value of the independent variable, the primary importance of the unit impulse is not what it is at each value of r, but rather what it does under convolution. Thus, frot^ the point of view of Hnear systemfi analysis, we may alternatively define the unit impulse as that signal whith, when applied lo an LTI system, yields the impulse response. That is, we define S(r) as the signal for which

x[t) = xiD^SU)

(2,138)

for any x(0- In this sense, sigt^als, such as ^a(0. ''a(0. etc., which correspontJ to short

A -- pulses v,\th vanishingly small duration as

* 0, all behave like a unit impulse in the

limitbecause, if we replace 5<r)byany of these signals, theneq. (2. 138) is satisfied in the

limit.
All the propenies of the unit impulse that we need can be obtained from the operalional definition given by eq, (21 38), For example, if we let ;r(r) = 1 for all r. then

= x{n = x{r)*d{T) = 6(r)*jr(0 =

¨(t);c(/ - T)dr

J

5(r)^T,

so that the unit impulse has unit area. It is sometimes useful to use another completely equivalent operational definition of
6(0. To obtain this alternative form, consider taking an arbitrary signal ^(r), reversing it
in time to obtain ^(-0^ ^^<^ then convolving this with 3(f). Using eq. (2. 138), we obtain

j?(-r) - ^(-n*fi(0 -

g{T-nHT}dT,

3 ---7

which, for/ - 0, yields

gm -

sir)air)dT.

\

(2.139)

132

Linear Time-Invariant Systems

Chap 2

Therefore, the operational definition of &(i) given by ¨i, (2 138) Implies eq (2.n9>. On
the other h<incl, eq. t2.1-39) implies eq. (2.138). To see this, let x(i] be a given .sign a], fix a time T, and define
sir) = xU - T).
Theii^ using eq. (2, 139), we have

- ^ -t(/)

J?(0)

^{T)fi(T)^T =:
J

jr(/ - T)^(T)^r,

which is precisely^. (2. 138) Therefore, eq. (2.139) is un eqiiiva.lent opeialional definimn

of the unit impulse. That is. the unit impulse is the signal which^ when muUipiied by a

-¨ si^na] };{f) and then integrated from

to +^> produces the value g(Q),

Smce we will be concerned pdncip^ly wivhLTl systeTt^s, and thus '^tth convotution.

the characterization of 5(f) given in eq. (2. 138) weII be the one to wiiich we will refer most

often. However, eq. (2.139) is useful in determining some of the other pnipenies of the

unit

impulse .

For

ex ample,

ccmsider

the

signal

/{fid (r),

where

/{ t)

is

another

si cjnal .

Then,

frumeq. (2,133),

I 5<T)/(T)5(r)cir = ff(0)/(O). On the other hand, if we consider the signal /<0)fi(f), we see that

(2 i4Q)

g{T)jmS(T)JT = s(0)fm
I

(2.141)

Comparing eqs. (2. 140) and (2. 141), we Tiivi that the two signals f[t) &(0 and J iQ)SU) behave identically when they are multiplied by any signal gir) and then integrated from -^to +£. Consequently, using this foim of the operaiional definition of signals, we conclude
that

/(0S(0 - /{0)S{t),

(2.142)

which IS a property that wederived by ahemative means in Section 1,4.2. [Seeeq. (rJ6).]

;2-5.3 Urtit Doublets and Other Singularity Function;
The unit impulse is one of a class of signals known as sinffularity function';, each of which can be defined, operational ly in terms of its behavior iin<ler cotivolution. Consider the LTl
system for which the output is the derivative of the input, i.e.,

><0=^^*^

(2.143,

The unit impulse response of this system (s the derivative of the unit impulse, which is called the unit doubkt u\{l}. From the convolutiun re|£^esentation for LTI systems, wc have

Sac Z.5

Singularity Functions

^ -^(0*¨i(0

133
(2,144)

for any signal j(/). Just a^ eq. (3J3S) serves as the operational definition of 6(t), we will take eq. (2,144) as the operational definition of ij|(f). Similarly, we can define U2U\ the
second derivative of 6(f), zs the impulse response of an LTI system that takes the s^econd derivative of the input, i.e.,

-^' = x{t)*^U2it).

(2.145)

From eq. (2, 144), we see that

^-Mt)
di^

d /dxi/)]
dt\ dt /

^(0^xi,(0*¨i(0>

(2.146)

and therefore,

= U2it)

wt(f) */#[{/).

f2.147>

> In general. wttO- A: Ojs the Jtth derivative of 6{t) and dius is die impulse response of a
system that taies the Ath derivative of the input. Since this system can be obtained as the
cascade of k differet^tiaton, we have

¨i{0 - ii](0^- *ifi(f) .
k times

(2.148)

As with the unit impulse, each of these singularity functions ha.s properties that can
be derived from its operational definition. For example* if we consider the constant signal x{t) = 1, we And that

^^ ^

= J^(O*M|(0 = f

^\{T}x(l- r)dT

U](T)dT.
I
SO that the unit doublet has zero area. Moreover if we convclve the signal È:(-- with U| (/). we obtain

j ^(r-OHi(r)rfr = gi-T)^U]{0 = '^^^^^^ - -g'{-tl

which^ for t = 0, yields

-gXO)=

j?(T)ui(T)i^r,

\

(2.149)

134

Linear Time-lnvanaTirt SystftTTis

C^ap 2

In an analogous manner, *e can derive related properties of Hi{r> and higher tjrder iingu

larily functions, and several i>f these properties are considered in Problem 2.69.

Ai with the unit impulse^ each of these singularity functions can be informaily re-

lated to short pulse*. For example, since the unit doublet is formally the derivadve of the

unit impulse* we can think of the douhiet as the idealization of the derivative of a short

pulse wi^ unit area. For instance, consider the short pulse S^{t) in Figure 1 .34. This pylse

behaves like an impulse as i ^> 0. Consequently, we would expect its derivative to be-

A ^ have like ^ donblet as

0, As verified in Problem 2,72. cf0i(/)/^f is as depicted in

Figure 2.36'. Lt consists of a unit impulse tit ; = with area +l^ii, fi>\lowed by a unit

hi impulse of area --

= at f

A. i.e..

^^ >-..-.),

(2.1,^0)

Consequ*^ntly, using the fact that x(t)* S(t - fa) = x(t - t^) [seeeq. (2.70)1, we find that

^ x(t} - x[l - A)

tix{t)

A

~ dt

(2.151>

where the approximation becomes increasingly accurate as A ^^ 0. Comparing eq. (2.151)
-- with eq. (2,144), we see that dS^itydt does indeed behave lÝe a unit doublet as A * 0.
In additit>n to singularity functions that are derivative;* \?f different orders of the iinit
impulse, we can -dlao define signals that represent successive integrals of the unit impulse function. As we saw in Example 2,13> the unit step is the impuht rcsponae of an
integrator:

yw =

X(T)dT.

Therefore,

= i^(0

5ij)dT,

(Z152)

d^i(t) dt

Ffgure 2.36 Tie derivative
{i&i,{t]/<ft of the siiort rectangufajpulse Sj(f^ of Figure 1 34.

Sec. 2.5

Singulanty FLinctions

and we also have the following operational definition of ii(/):

135

<2,153)
Similarly^ we can deline the system that consists of a cascade of two integrators. Its
impulse response is denoted by u.2(t\ *hich is simply the convolution of H<f), the impulse response of one integrator, with itself:

(2.154)

< > Since u{r) equals for ^

and equaJs 1 for r 0, it follows that

(2.155)
This signal, which is referred to as the unit ramp junction^ is shown in Figure 2.37. Alsu,
we can obtain an operatioml deHnition for the behavior of w-^^f) under a>nvolution from
eqs. (2.153) and (2.154):
= x(t) * H-2(0 xiO * u(r) * u{t)

= if xia)da]*u(f)

(2.156)

H(f_>^"^H'"
In an analogous fashion, we can define higher order integrals of SO) as the impulse
responses of cast:ades of integrators^

U.k(.t) ^ Hit)*

*ua) = \

U.^f,.y^{T)dT.

^--' V

^

/--^

k times

(2.157)

The convolution of Jr(f) with u-],i,t),u.^(t\ . . , generate correspondingly higher order
integrals of a(J). Also, note that Uie integrals in eq. (2.157) can be evaluated direcdy (see

U j[l)

Slope = 1
' Figurc Z.37 Unit ramp lunctron.

136

Linear Time- Invariant Systems

OU^. 2

Ptoblern 2.73), as wasi <ione in eq. (2.155), to obcain

Thus unlike the derivaiivts of 5(0^ the successive integralis of the unit impulse are functions thatcanbedeAnedforeach vaJneof r[eq. (2.)5S)],as well as by their behavior under
convolution.
At times i: wiEl be worthwhile to use an alternative notation for5(^) and w<r>, namely,

6(0 = ¨o(a
H(0 = M-Ka

(2- 1 59^ (2,160)

> With this notation, Ujt(f) for jt

denotes the laipulss rfispcnse of a casc^ide of k differ-

< entiators, wo(') IS the impulse response of the identity system, and, fot ft 0. Uft(/) is the

impulse respond of a cascade of ]A:| ititegrators. Furthermore, since a differendator is the

inverse systtcm of an integrator,

¨(0*¨i(0 = 5(0.

or, in our alternative notation,

r^_,(0*i^i(O - ¨(>(0.

(^^161)

More generally, from eqis (2J48), (2J57), and (2.161), we see that for any integers k
and r,

Uf(/)*U,(f) - Wt-HrW,

(1162)

iik and rare bodi positive, eq, (2.162^ states that a cascade of Jt differentiators followed by
r more differeniiatois yields an output that i^ the (it + r)th derivative of the input. Similarly, if k is negative and r is negative, we have a cascade of |^j integrators followed by another \r[ integrators. Also, if k is negative and r is positive, we have a cascade of k tntcgrators
followed by r differentiators, and the overall sysLetn is equivalent to a castiade of |jfe -r rf
integrators A if -I- r < 0, a cascade of k+r differentiators if ^ + r ^^ 0, or the idendty system
if ^ -H r ^ 0, Therefore, by defining stngul^ty functions in terms of their behavior under convolution, we obtain a characterization that allows us to manipulate them with relative esise and to interprei them dketUy in terms of their significance for Lit systems. Since
this is our primary concern in the book, the operational definition for singularity functions
that we have given in thi.^i section will suffice for our purpose*;.*

'^As mtnlu:ned in Chapter ^ , singularity funchons have been neavily >>tudLt:d in the field of mattiematjc^ under the ^hern^t.ve n^iues of x^ncraitze'd fwurfion.'^ and di^fributiifn [ht>oi~v, Tlie apprV£ach wc have taken jn tlU^JiectiOii]!! At:tua]ly clu^ly allied in spirit with the rigorous appruai^h taken in the references given in footnote 3 of SeclioJl 1 4.

Chap. 2

Probl&ms

137

2,6 SUMMARY
In this chapter, we have deveLoped important reprcscritations for LTI systems, both in discrete time and in continuous time. Iji discrete lime we derived a representation of signals as v^eighted sums of shifted unit impulses, and we then used this to derive the convolu rion sum representation for the response of a discrete-time LTI system In continuous time we
derived an analogous representation of concinncus-time signals as weighted integTal$ of
shifted unit impui^s. and we used this to derive the convolution integral representation
for continuous- time LIT systems These representations are extremely important, as they aJlow us to compute the response of an LTI system Lo an ajbitrary input in terms of the systern's response to a unit impulse. Moreover, in Section 2.3 the convotutiansjum and integral provided us with a means of analyzing the properties of LTI systems and, in particular, of relating LTI system properties, including causality and stability, to corresponding proper-
ties of the unit impulse response. Also, in Seetion 2.5 we developed an interpretation of
m the continuous-lime unit impulse and other related singularity functions terms of their
behavior litider convolution. TTris interpretation is particularly usefui in the arialysis of LTI
systems.
An important class of continuous-time systems consists of those described by linear
consitant-cocfficient differential eqirations. Similarly, in discrete time, linear constanl-
coefficieni difference equations play an equally important role. In Section 2.4, we exam-
ined simple examples of differential and difference equations and discussed sonne of the properties of systems described by these types of equadons. Jn particular, systems described b> linear constant-coefficient differential and difference equations together with the condition of initial rest are causal and LTI. In subsequent chapters, we will develop additional totjls that greatly facilitate our ability to analyze such systems.

Chapter 2 Problems
The first section of problems belongs to the basic categoiy, and the answers are provijded in the back of the book. The remaining three sections contain prtjblems belonging to the basic, advanced, and extensiori categories, respectively.
Extension problems introduce applications, concepts, or methods beyond those pre-
sented in the tej:t.

BASIC PROBLEMS WITH ANSWERS

2.1. Let

4rt] ^ S[n]-t2S[fi- \]-$\rt-3\ and h[n] - 2d[n + I] - 2S[n - ]].

Compute and plot each of the following convolutions:

(a) j^[¨l = ^[rjl#hN

(b) y2[n] - x{n^2]*h[n\

1 38 Z2, C&nsider the signal

Linear Time- Invariant Systems

Chap, 2

Express A and B in terms of n so that the following equation holds:

h[n -f^} = Uj

elsewhere

2.3, Consider an input jr[w] and a unit impulse response /i{n] given by

^["1 = (j) "[" - 2],
h[n] ^ u[n + 2]. Determine and plot the output y[n] = x[n]* h[n].
2.4. Compute and plot y\n] - jc{n] * h[n], where

0,

^ ljr,,i

1.
J

0,

otherwise '
4 s n ^ 15
otherwise

2.5. Let

*J ^^wl^'^^ = ^i

= 1.

È rt ^ N

''f'']

0, elsewhere

^ where iV

9 is an integer. Deienriine the value of ^, given^hat>[n] -- jc[n]* hifi]

and

yl41 = 5. Jtl4] = 0. 2.6, Computa and plot the convolution y[jj] - x[n] */i[n]^ where

- r[nl

[^ j u[-n - 1] and ftln] = u[n - 1].

A 2.7, Linear system 5 has the relationship

2IC

y[ni =

- ^tfclglw 2/tl

between its input x[n] and its output y[n], where ^[n] = u[n] - u[n - 4].

Chap. 2

Problems

(a) Determine y[n] when x[n] = d{n - ]]. (b) Determine y[n] when x[n] = d\n -- 2]r
(c) IsJLTT'?
= (d> Determine >[rtl when ;t[/il u[n].
2.8_ Determine and sketch the convolution of the following two signals:

\t+l,

^ r 1^ 1

[ 0,

elsewhere

+ + + h(t) = Sit 2) 2&(t I).

2.9. Lfil

h(t) = e"'u(-f + 4) + e'^'uir - 5),

Determine A and B such that

f^T -T) = iO,

A<T<B.

139

2,10. Suppose d^at

*
I

0^,

eellsseewwl"here

= < and h(i) x(t/a), where

a :^ 1,

= (a) E>etermiTie and sketch y(i)

x(t) * h{t).

(b) If dyOydt cyjiiains only three discontinuities, what is die value of a ?

2.11, Let

= xit)

u{t - 3> - H<f - 5) and hit) = e'^'uijl

(a) Compute ,v(0 = ^(0 * KO= (b> Compute g{t) (dxii)/dO * h{i). (c> How is gU) related to y<t}?
212. Let

< Show that y(/) = Ae ' for :^ / 3, and determine the value of A.

140

Linear rttne-lnvaiant Systems

Chap. 2

2A\ Consider a discrete-time system 5i with impulse response

= (a) Find the integer A such That h[n] -- Ah[n - 1] È[rt].
(b) Using the result from part <a>. determine the LTupulse rcipan&e ^[n] of an LTI system S^ which is the inverse system of Si .

2*14^ Which of the ti^Uowmg in^pulse veRpcins;es con:espond(s) to stable LTJ s^siems?

= (a) hi(t) e-^^-^J^'u(0

(bl /i3(0 = e' cos(2t)uit)

2.15, Which of the following impulse responses correspoiid(s) lo stable LTI sysieins?

(a) hi[n\ = ficos(^/t)M[Hj

[h) hi[n) =- 3"H[-fH- 10]

2,1(1,

For each of the following statements, ieteimirie whether it is true or false:

< < = (a) If x[rt]

f{>r ¨

A^i and h[n] =

(or n

^;, then x[n] * h[r.]

n < Ni + N2.

= (b) If >'[nj

x[nl*;i(n],thenyr" - ]] ^ x[n - - I] '^ h[n \].

(c) If y<0 = :t(f)*Kf),theny(-f) - x{-0* h{-t).

- > > (d) If x{i)

for /

r, ajid h{t) -

fcr /

T2. then x{t) + A(/) -

~ for
for / =>

2,17* Consider an LTI system whose input x(0 and output v(f) are related by rhe differ-
ential e^Aiation

-->tO + 4v(0 = 40.
at

CP2J7-1)

The system al^ satisfies the condition of initial rest,

= (a) If j:(f)

^^"'^^^^'uCr), \vhatisy(r)?

(lo) Note that {R'eljr(/)} will satisfy eq. (P2.1 7-1) with CR^{jv(;;i}. Determine the out-

put yit) of the LTI system if

2*18£ Consider a causal LTI system whose input x[n] and output y[n] are related by the
difference equation
yM = ^M¨- 1] + xin].
Determine yln] if Jc[?;j = S[n -- I].
2,19. Consider the cascade of the follotving two systems S\ and S2, as depicted in Figure
P2.I9:

m

win)

Si

S)

*- vN

Figure PZ.T9

Chap, 2 Pmblems

'*'

Si : causal LTI.

w[¨]

=

2^[n

-

+ 1]

Jc[n3;

S2 : causal LTI,
y[n] = txy[n -- H + ^w[n].

The difference equation relating jclii) and y[n] is:

yl/iJ = -:gyin -2] + -y[n - ]] + j^nl

(a) EJetennJTie a and ^. (b) Show the impulse response of ttw cascade connection of Si and S^.
2,20^ Evaluate che following intcgr^sr (a) 'luo(f}cos(0-^r
f
<b) j^sin(27rt)6<i + 3}dt
(c> j_jUi(l -^ T)cos(27rT)Èf'r

BASIC PROBLEMS
2J1, Compute the convolution y[n] - J([n] * h[n] of the following pairs of signals:

aM¨] 0>) x\n\ = h\fi] =

(d) j:[n] and ft[n] are as in Figure P2.21.

xtn]

^111

-1012345

r

h[n]

..:iinii...iiiiii_

01?34567S9tOtl12 1314 15 16

n

Figure P2.2I

2,22^ For each of the following pair^ of waveforms, use the convolution integral to find the response y{t^ of the LTl system with impulse response hit) to the input xit). Sketch your results.

" (^ ^0 (a) ^^^^

^-fll"*-^^ I

tliis both when a ?^ ^ and when ff ^

142

Linear T^me-lnlvariant Systems

Cftap. 2

(b) xit) = uO) - 2uit - 2) + h(^ - 5)
h{t) = e^uil -t)
(c) j:(r)and A[0 arc aji in FiguieP2.22(a), (d) x{f) and ^if/) arc as in Figure P2,22(b), (e) xiT) and h{T) are as In Figui^ P2.22(c).

Wi

On* penod of sin flt
{a)

3t

r^)

Slope =" a
(bj
m

Tt
m

11, n r^ -? -11

r 1

23 t

~

I

-1

:\

1

t

(c)

FigijFieP2,32

2.23, Let k(r) be the triangular pulse shown in Figure P2.23(a), and let xit) be the impuisc train depicted in Figure P2 23(b), That is,

- ^ 3^
= x(i) J^ Sit- kTX
k = -^

Determine and sketch y(t) = xO) * hO) for the foUowing values of T:

(a) 7 = 4

(b) T = 2

<c> r = 3/2

(d) T = I

Chap. 2

Problems

htj

14J

zlk

-1

1

m

-1 It t 'ft 1 1 1 1 1-

-TO -2T

T 2T art

(b)

Figuie P2.2i

2.24. Consider the cascade incercotmection of three cau^ LTI ^ystems^ illustrated in Fig-
ure F2.24{a). The impulse response hiln] is
h2{n] = u[n] - u[n - 2),
and the overall impulse response is as shown in Figure P2.24(b),

x[nj

hJnl

^ ^{r\]

(a)

h2[n)

yM

11 10
3

-101234-567
(b)

Figure P2.24

(a) Find the itupulse response /ti[/i]. (b) Find the response of the overall system to the input
x[n] = S[n] - S[n - 1].

144

Linear "nFrw-lnvariant Systems

Chap. 2

2-2S. Let the signal
where

y[ft] -= x[Tt] * h[nl

jc[rt] =3"u[-n-l\-h[^-\ u[nl

and

M¨] =|i.l ¨[^ + 3}.

(a) Detennine }'[n] u^^r^uf utilizing the distributive property of convolution, (b)- D<iierTnii:iÈ yin\ utilizing the di^butive pTV>perty of convotuiiOTi.

2,26, Constder the evaluation of

yM = JTi [n] + jjfn] * jTjW

where jti[^] = (0.5Tu[nl X2[n] = m(^ + 31. and xjln] = d[n]-S[i7 - ly

(a) Evaluate the convolution xi[n] * x2[Ti\.

(b) Convoive the result of part (a) with x^[n] in order to evaluate y[n].

(c) Evaluate the convolution ;iC2[n] * rr3[¨].

(d) Convolve the result of part (c) with xi[n] in order to evaluate y[n].

We 2J11.

define the area under a continuous -time signal v(r) as

4,,. .= I /

= Show that if yit)

jc<r) * /t(*l, then

At^du

2,28^ The following are the impulse i^sponses of discrete-time LTl systems. Determine
whether each system is cau&al and/or stable. Jusdfy your answers,
(a) h\n] - i\fu[n\ (h) h[n] - (0.&rK[n + 2]
(c) h{n-\ = (i)"¨[-¨]
(e) /i[¨] - i-\ru[n\ + {\.Qiyu{n- i| (f) M'J] = i-\Yi^{n\ + (LOirw[l - n] (B) /i[n] = n(^)"u[ft-l]
2,Z9£ The following are die impulse responses of continuous-time LTI systems. Determine whether each system is causal and/or stable. Justify your ans^vers. (a) /i(f) = i?-*if(r-2>
(b) h{t^ = e-^uO - f) (c) h{t) = e-^u(t + 50)
-0 (d) h{t) = e^ui-X

Chap, 2

Problems

l^S

= (f) ft(0 te-'uiO

2.30- Consider the first-fntier difference equation

- = >[fl] + 2y[n 1]

JcLn].

Assumingiheconditionof Jniualrest(i,e., if jf{n] = Oforn <; rto+^dvl'i] - t'for
< n ¨(]), find the impulse response of a system whose inpnt and output arc rclated by
this difference equation. You may solve the problem by rearranging the difference
m equation so as to express y[Ft] terms of y[¨ -- 1 J Euid x[n] and generating the values
ofy[Ol, yf + ljr + y( 2),... in that order.
331' Consiiler the LTI system initially at rest and described by the dijference equation

+ y[fi] + lylti -I] = x[n] 2x{n - 2],

Find the response of this system to the input depicted in Figure P2.3 1 by solving the
difference eqoatioti recursively.

'tlnl

'1.'UU r1
-2-1 12 34

n Rgun>P2.31

232* Consider the diffetvnce equation

yW-^y[n-l] = x[nl

(P2.32-1)

and suppose that

^[n] =

"["]

[3)

(P2.32-2)

Assume that the solutioii^jvlnt con^sts of the sum of a particular solution yp[n] to eq. {P2.32-1) and a homogereous solution yhin] satisfying the equation

(a) Verify that the homogeneous solution is given by
yf,[rt] = ^[2

(b> Let us consider obtain^g a particular solubon yp[n] such tliat

1

.

_. /n"

yp[n] ~ ^^^pt" ~ ^^ ~ I3 1 "^"^

f 46

Lin^^r Time- Invariant Systems

Ch^p. 2

^ By assuming thai yp[n] is of the form ^(3)" for £ 0, anil substituting thU in

the above difference equation^ detemiioe the vaiue of B,

(c) Suppose that the LTI system described by eq. (P2.32-1) and initially at rest has

= < as its input the signal specified by eq. (P2,32-2), Smce x[ti\

for n 0, we

have that y{n] -- for ¨ <; 0. Also, from parts (a) and (b) we have that y[n]

has fhe form

M.]^.(iy..(ij

^ Corn O-lnorder to sv^lveforthe unknown conatantA,wtmustspecifyavalue
for y[n] for some n ^ 0. Use the condition of jnitial resi and eqs. JP2J2-1) and (P2.32-2) to determine >10]. From this value determine the constant A . The
resuhof thii calculation yields the solution to the difference equation (P2.32-1)
h under the condition of initial rest, when the input given by eq, (P2.32-2)

2,33. Consider a system whose input x(t) and output yit) satisfy the first-onler differential
equation

^ +2y(;)- ^(0.

(P2J3-I>

The system also satisfies the condition of initial rest,
(a) ti) Determine the system output yi(t) when the mput i.i X] (t) = e^'u{T). (ii) Determine the system output y2<J) when the input is x^U) = e^^uit). [iii) DeteTTTiine the system output y^^i^t) when the input is x^{t) = ae^'uU) + ^e~^H(t), where a and j3 are real rumbers. Show that ^^(0 ^ a>](0 +

Now (iv>

let x\{i) and X2{i) be arbitrary signals such that

X](t) -= iX for t<ti,

< - xzit)

a for ;

f2

Letting

> ]

(f )

he

the

system

output

for

input

x ]

(t),

y2 (r)

be

the

system

output

fi)rinput JC2(0> and y3(f) be the system output for J:i(0 = ax\(j) + Pxi{t),

sht)W that

y^U) = o>y\(t)+^y2it).

We may therefore conclude thai the system under consideration is linear.

(h) u) Determine the system output y\{t) when the input is X[ii) = Ke^uir).

(ii) Determine the system output y^iO when the mput is jc^^O - f(e^*'~^^

uU - T). Show that y^it) = y^it-T).

Now < <iii)

let xi(i) be an arbitrary signal such thai x\(t) = for ^ tfy. Letting

>((/) be the system output for input X[(0 and y2(t) bo the system output
for xiU) == x-\(t - T), show that

yi<t) -= y\U-Tl

Chap. 2

Problems

147

We may therefore conclude that the system under consideration is time invariant- In conjunction with the result derived in part (aK we conclude
that the given system is LTl. Since this systeni satisfies the condition of
initial rest^ it is caufial a^ well.

2^4, The initial rest assumption corresponds to a ^ero-valued auxiliary condition being imposed ai a time determined in ^cordance with the it^put signal. In this problem we show that if the aujtihary condition used is nonzero or if it is always applied at a
fixed time (regardLe&s of the input signal) the corresponding system cannot be LTI. Ct>nsideT a system whose input x{t) and output yit) satisfy the first-older differential equation (P2.33-n.
(a) Given che auxiliary condition y( 1) = I, use a counterejcample to show that the
system it> not linear.
{b) Given the auxiliary condition >(!) = 1, use a counterexample to show that the
system is not time invariantr
(c) Given the auxiliary condition y(\) = I, show that the system is incrementally
linear.
(d) Given the auxiliary condition y(l) = 0, show that the system is linear but not
time invariant.
(e) Given the auxiliary condidon y{i}) + y(4) = 0, show that the system is linear
but not time invariant

2,35* In the previous problem we saw that application of an auxiliary condition at a fixed

time (regardle=is of the input signal) leads to the corresponding system being not

time-mvanant. In thisprohlem, we explore the effect of fixed auxiliary conditions on

the causality of a system. Consider a system whose input j:(^) ana output ylf) satisfy

the first-order differential equaticn {P2.33-1). Assume that the auxiliary condition

associated with the differential equation is y(0) = 0, Determine the output of the

system for each of the following two inputs:

= <a) xy(t)

0, for all r

a /< -I

Observe that if vi (f) is the output for input X] (r) and yi{f) is the output for input

< X2(t\> then 3'| (r) and ^^(r) are not identical for /

-- 1, even though jcj (i) and jcj^t)

< are identical for / -- 1 . Vas this ^>bser\ation as the basis of an argument to conclude

that the given system is not causal.

2.36. Con?iider a discrete-time system whose input x[7i] jind output y[n] are related by

y[n] - \^\yU - I] + x[ril

(a> Show that if this system satisfies the condition of initial rest (i.e., if x[n] =
< for n < no, then y[r)] = for n n<i), then it is liiwar and time invariant.
(b> Show that if this sysiet^ does not satisfy the conditim of initial rest, but instead uses the auxiliary condition yfOj = 0, it is noL causal. IHinr: Use an approach
similar to that ustd in Problem 235]

m

!48

Linear TirTie-lnvariam Systems

Chap 2

237. Consider a system whose input and output ai¨ related by the first-order differential

equation (P2,33-l>. Assume that the system satisfied the condition of finaJ rest [i. e,,

> h - if x(t}

for /

^0, then y(r) = Ofort> /q]. Show that this system ?io/ causal.

[Hint: Consider two inputs to the system, X\ (t) = -- and X2{t) = e'(ii{0 -- u{t 1)),

which result in outputs ^iCf) and >^(f), respectively. Then show that vi(0 ^ ^(0

for t<0.]

2*3fL Draw block diagram representations for causal LTl systems described by the fol-
Jowin^ difference equations^
(a) yln] = '^y[n - I] + ^x[n]
a£) y[n] = iy[n'l]-i^x[n- 1]

239, Draw block diagram representations for causal LTI systems described by the fol-
lowing diffcrentiaV equations:
{a) y(t) = ~(l)dy(tydt-h4x(t)
(b) dy{Wi -f 3Mr) = x{t)

AOVANCEO PROBLEMS

'2.40. (a) Consider an LTI svstem with input and output related through the equation

J--
What is the itupiU&e response h{t) far this system? (b) Determine the response of the system when the input x(t) is as shown in Figure
m

-1

t f^igune P2.40

2,41, Consider the signal

x[n] -(r'^ulnl
{£) Sketch the signal g[n] - x[ji] - Qx{n - 1],
(b) Use the result of part (a> im conjunction with properties of convolution in order
to detenriine a sequence h[h] such diat

hM x[n] *

=

IV
(- {¨[n

+

2]

-

u[n

~

2]}.

I

ZAl. Suppose that the sigjiEil

x{j) = uO + 0.5)- flit- Q5)

Chap. 2

Problems

149

and the signal

hit) - *J'"^^

(a) Determine a value of oio which ensures that

- where y(f)

x{i\ * fe(f>.

(b) Is your answer to the previous part unique?

2,43. OneoftheLmportantpropeitieÈOifconvi:h]ntion,]nbochcontmuou$ and di Excrete time,
is the associativity property. In this problem, we wLU check and illustrate this prop-
erty,
(a) Prove the equality

IxiO * hit)] * gU) = x(t) * \h(t) ^ g(t)]

(P2.43^1)

by showing that both sides of eq. (P2,43-!> equal

fj. x{T)hi(r)g(t - r - (T)dTd<f
(b> Considcir two LTI systems with the unit sample responses A^[n] and h.j{Fi\ shown in Figure PZ.43(a). These two systems are cascaded as shown in Figure
P2.43(b>, Let j[n] = u\nY

^iiN=(-^ru[n]
wH * * *

hj[n] - ki[n] +^u[n-l] 1t

* t 12 3 4
(aj

>t[nj
Figure PZ.43

hih]

wlrl

h^[nj

W

*-y(nj

.

)

150

Linear Tlmfr-lnvahant Systems

Chap 2

(i) Compute yin] by first computing w[n] = x[n] * h\[ii\ and then computing

= y{n] = w[fi] * h2[n]; that is, y[n]

[x[n] * hi[ti\] * h2inl

= (ii) No\^ find y[n] by first convotving hi[ri\ and hiln] to obtain g[n]

= h\\n\ * h2[n] and then convolving x[n] with ^fln] to obtain y\7i\

The answers to [i) and (ii) should be identical, illustrating the associativity prop-
erty of discrete-time convolution. (c> Consider the cascade of two UTl systems as in Figure P2,43(b), where in this

k\[n] = sin 8m

and

hiM = ¨"w[nl \a\<i,

and where the input is

x[n] = S[n]-aS[n - 1J.

Determine the output y{n]. {Hint: The use of the associative and ccmmutative
properties of convotuiion should greatly facihtate the solution
2.44, (a) If

= > x{n

0. |f|

r,,

and

= > hit)

0, \t\

T2.

then

xir)*hU) = a \i\>Ti

for some positive number Tj, Express T^ in leims of Tj and 7^.
A (b) discrete-time LTl system has iofKit x[n], impulse response h[n}, and output

y[nl If h[n] is known to be zero everywhere outside the interval N^y r^ n r^

Ni and x[n\ is known to be zero everywhere outside the interval N2 ^ n ^

Af^, [hen the output y\n] is constrained to be zero everywhere, except on some

^ interval Nt -^ n

N5,

(i) Detemiine N4 and JV5 in terms of Vo. i^i.Ni, and N^

^ ^ ^ (ii) If the interval Nf^

n N\ i& of length Mj,. N2

n ^ l^^i^ of length

^ ^ My A/j, and N4

n

N^ is of length My, express

in terms of A/ft

and Mj.

= (c> Consider a thscrete-dmeLTI system with the property that if the input ;c[n]

> ^ for all rt

10, then the output y[n] = fof all n

15. What condidon must

h[n]. the impulse response of the system, satisfy for this to be true?

(d) Consider an LTl system with impulse response in Figure P2,44, Over what in -

terval must we know x(t) in order to deterrtiine ><(}>?

Chap. 2

Problems

h(t;i

151

-
1
-2 -i

e t Figure P2.44-

2^45, (a) Show that if the response of an LTl system to x(i) is the output y(t\ then the
response of the system to

^'(0 -
dt
is y'(0* Do this im>bJcn] in three different ways:
(i) Directly from the properties of linearity and time invariance and the fact
(hat
xit) - x{t - h) x'{t) - lim

(ii) By differentiating the convolution integral, (iii) By examining the system in Figure P2.45.

X(l)

H"iW

m

y(tj

Figure PJ.4S

(b) Denionstrate the vali<lity of the fallowing relatio<nships;
(i) y(0-^0*A'(0
[Hint: These ai% easily done usin^ block diagrams as in ^iii) of part ia.) and the
factthatfij(f)*ii-|(0 = 5</).] (c) An LTT system has the response y(f) ~ sin^L^o^ to input x{t) = e~^'uit). Use
the result {>f part (a) to aid in determiniog the impulse response of this system.
(d> Let sit) be the unit stepiesponse of a continuous-time LTI system. Use part (b) to deduce that the response yiO to the input x(t) is

Show also that

ñr:- yCO

(r) * S{i - T)dT,

(P2,45-l)

Xit) =

x'{TMt-T)dT.

[P2.45-2>

1 52

Linear Time-Invariant 5/st¨ms

C^p, 2

(e) Use eq. (?2A5-\ ) to determine the response of 5un LTI system with step responw
sit) = ie-^' - 2e-^ + l)u(0
to the input jr(l) - f'ufJ). (0 Let s[n] be the unit step response of a discrete-titne LTI system. What are the
discrete-time counteipaits of eqs. (P2.45-1) and (P2.45-2)?
= 2*46, Consider an LTI system 5 and a signal x{t) 2^ "^'u(f - 1). If
-- xU) £ y(t)

and

dxjt)
tit

-3y(0

+

-2/. ^"''u(f).

detemune the impulse response hit) of 5,

We We 2,47.

are given a certmn linear time- in\ ariant systean with impulse response Ao(f).

are told that when the input is xo(t) the output is yo(ty which is stetched in Figure
P247, We are then givet) the following set of inputs to Unear time-mvariant systems

with the indicated impulse tiesponses:

Input x(t)

Impulse response h(t)

(a) x(t] - 2xoU) - = (h) x{t) Jfo(0 xo(t --2)

Mi (c) xit) =

- 2)

(d> xil) = xai-t)

it) xU) = xo{-t)

(!) x(t) = xi(0

Ks) - Ao<f)

= hit)

hty(t)

hit) = ho(t + I)

hit) = hoit)

hit) = hoi-t)

= hit)

hi,{t)

[Here x'^it) and h'^it) denote the first derivatives of xo{f) and ho(t}, respectively.]

Voft)

O

2

t Figure P2A7

In each of these cases, determine whether or not we have enough information
to detemfune the output y<0 wlien the input is x{t) and the system hsts impulse response h(t). If it is possible to detenuine y{t)^ provide an accurate sketch of it with numerical values clearly indicated on the graph.

Chap. ?

Probtems

153

2.48. Detertniire whether each of the following fitatements concerning LTI systems is true

or false. Justify your answers,

{a) Ifhir) is the impulse response of an LTJ system and hit) is periodic and nonzeto^

the &ysttin is unstabk.

<b) The inv^se of a causal LTI s^st^iifi J^ always causal, .

^ K ^ (c) if |/j[ii]j

for each n, where is a given number, then the LTI system with

k[n] as its impulse respond is stable.

(d) If a discrete-time LTI system has an impulse response hf/t] nf finite duration,

the system is stable

<e) If an LTI systetu is causal, it is stable,

(f) T^e cascade <>f a noncausal LTI ^^r^terti with a cau^l one i$ necf^^sanly non-

causaU
A (g) continuDUS'time LTI system is .stable if and only if its step response sit) is
-- absolutely intcgrablo -that is, if and only if

A (h)

discrete-time LTI system is causal if and only if its step response jf/j] is lero

< for rt 0.

2A9, In die text, we showed tbat ifh[n\ is absolutely summabLe, i.e., if

then the LTI system with impulse response h[n] is suble. This means that absolute
sUTiunabiUty is a sufficient c^>nditii>n for stability. In this problem, we shall show that it h also a necessary condition. Consider an LTI system with impulse response
h\n] that is not absolutely summaftjie; that is.

(a) Suppose that the input to this system is

Docs this input signal represent a bounded input? If so, whit is the smallest nuxTiber B such that

^ B [:r[nj|

for all n?

154

Linear Time-lmvariant Systems

Chap, 2

(b) Calculate the output at n = U for this particul^ choice of inp\il. Does the re-
sult prove the contention that absolute summability is a necessary condition for
stabihty?
(c) In a simiLar f&shioiii show that a continuous-thne LTI system is stable if and
only if its impulse response is absolutely integrable.
2-50. Consider the cascade of two systems shown in Figure P2-50- The fir^t system^ A^ is known lo be LTL The second system, B^ is known to be the inverse of system A. l-et
A yi (0 denote the response of system lo Xiii), and let y^Cf) denote the response of
system A to Jf:2(0

LTI

Vit)

System

System

B

A

^x(l)

FIgtJre P2.S0

in) What is the response pf system fi to the input a.vi(f> -^ by^it), where ¨ and l> are
constants?
(b) What is the response of system fl to the input yiit - t)"^ 2.51* In the text, we saw that the overall input-output relationship of the cascade of two
LTI systems does not depend oxi the order in which they are cascaded. This fact, known zs the commuiativity property, depends on both the linearity and the time
invariance of both systems. In this problem, we illustrate the point,
A (a) Consider two discrete-cime systems A and B> where system is an LTI system
with unit sample response h[n] = (l/2)"u[rt]. Systc^m B, on the other hand, is linear but time varying. Specifically, if the input to system B is w[n], its output
IS
z[n] -- nw[n].
Show that the commutativity property does not hold for the^e two systems by compuLng the impulse responses of the cascade combinations in Figures
F2.5l(a) and P2.5l(b), respectively

System ^System

y[n!

A

B

System

.^System

y[fil

B

A

{a)

(tJ)

Figure PZ.5T

(b) Suppose that we replace system B in each of the interconnected systems of
Figure P2.51 by the system with the following relationship between its input w[n] and output zVn]:
z\n] = wM+2.
Repeat the calculations of part (a) in this case.

)

Chap. 2

Problems

155

2,52, Consider a discrete-time LTl system with unit sample response
h[n\ = {n f na"u[nl

where \a\ < K Show that the step response of this system is

1
Ja- 1)^

Of

a

(¨

-

T^^-^
l>^

(a-

{¨+ ])a" u n\.

{Hint: Note that
.Vh I
2-*) (* + '>¨* = ;^7
fr=*>
2.53. (fl) Consider the homogeneous differetilial equation

¨^
J:*
*=<)

= 0,

Show that if S{) is a solution ot the equalicn

(P2.,^3-l

(P2.53-2^

then Ae^'^^ is a solution of eq. (P2.53-1X where /I is an arbitrary complex con-

stant,

(b) The polynomiaJ pis) in eq. (P2.5T--2) can be factored in terms of Jts roots

J i> as , . .

,

I

.

pis) = tJNiS - Sif^is " S.f ...is- J,r.

-- where the s, are the distinct solutions of eq, (P2,5.^-2) and the (r, are their
multiplicities that is, the number of times each root appears as a solution of the equation. Nyte that

+ + = *Tt

+ a-2

. ..

cr^

A/.

> In general, if <t,

I , then not only is A&^'* a solution of eq. (P2..^3-l ),

hut so is At^e^^'.a.^ long as; is an integer greater than or equal to ?ero and lesi

- than or equal to <T^ I. To illustrate this, shuw that if iT; = 2, then /Ife ^ Ms a

solution of eq. {P2.53-1). [Hint: Show that if j is an arbitrary complex number,

then

2

i=0

as

T 56

Un^ar Tlme-lnvariaflt Systems

Chap. 2

ThuSi the most general solution of eq. (P2.53"l) is

where the A,j are Eirbitraiy eomples constant*,

(c) Solve the following hornogeneou^ differential equations with the >>peciJied aux-

iliary conditions:

^ (i)

3J^ +

a = = H- 2yit)

y(0)

0, >'(0) = 2

^ 3^ (ii)

+

+ 2y(0 = 0. >(C) = J. yX^) = -1

^ 3^ (iii)

+

a - = + 23</)

>^0> = 0, y'yO)

^ +2^ (iv)
(V)
^^ ^2^ ^ ym (vi)

+ y(t) = a y(0} = I /(O) = 1

+

-

- - = y(f)

0, 3^(0)

1.

-h

+

ym + Syit) = 0,

= h /(O) = 1

y"m = -2

2.54. {a) Consider' the homogeneous diHbreni^e equation

ft=o
^ Show that if is a solution of the equation

A then AiJ is ^ soluHon of eq. (P2.54--1), where is an arbitraty ccnstant.
(b) As it is more convenient for the moment to work with polyTiomials that have
only nonnegadve powers of È, consider the equatioit obtained by rnuitiplymg
both sides of eq. (P2.54-2) by ^:

= Jt
The polynomial p{i} can be lacvored as

where the S|

Zr are the distinct roots of /)(;).

Show that if jh-f/t] =^ rt^""'^then

Use this fact to show that if -T, = 2,ihen both A^^ and^nzf ' are solutions of
eq, (P2.54-i)£ where A and fi are arbitrary complex constants. More generally^
> one can use this same procedure to show thai ii^, I, then

^

Chap. 2

PfobleiT^s

157

r\{n -rV

is a scluiion of eq. (P2.54-1) for r - 0. I

(Ti -\ 7

(c) Solve the foltowing homogeneous difference cquadoiis with (he specified aux-

iliary [:orLditions:

(i> yVn\ + ly[£ "11 + yin-2] = 0; y[01 = 1, y[- [] = -6

-21-0; - tii> y[n] 2yln - 1] -^ y\n

ylO] - 1. >f I] -

-U (iii) >{h] - 2y[n

+ y[fi-2]^0; y[0} = 1, y[10J - 21

Ov) y[n] - 4y{n - J] + \y[fi-2] = 0; >rO] = 0. y[-\] = 1

2^. In Kbt text we de^hbed one method for solving linear constant-coefficient difference

equations, and another method for doing this \vas illustrated in Probbm 2.30. If the

assumption of initial rest is made so that the system describ&i by the differeiice

equation is LTl and causal, dten, in principie, we can determine the unit impul^

response h[n] using either of these procedures. In Chapter 5, we describe another

method that allows us to detenmine h[n] in a more elegant wa>. In this pircblem we

describe yet another approac:h£ whtch basically shows that k[n] can be determined

by solving the homogeneous equation with appropriate initial conditions.

(a) Consider the System initially at rest and described by the equation

Assuming that x[ti\ - 6[rtL ^*^at is ytOl? What equation doc& h[n\ satisfy

^ for n

1, and with what auxiliary condition? Solve this equation to obtain

a closed-form expression for k{n].

(b) Consider ne^t the LTF system initially ax rest and described by the difference

equation

yM - ^y[n ~\] = x[n] + 2x[n - 1].

(F2.5S-2)

LH This system U depicted in Figure P2 .55(a) as a cascade of two

systems that

arc initially at rest; Because of the properties of LTI systems, we can reverse

the Older of the systems in the cascade t<> obtain an alternative representation
of the same overiJl system, as illustrated in Figure P2.55(b), From this fact,

use the result of part (ai to determine the impulse response for the system described by eq, (P2.55-2),

(c) Consider again the system of part (a), with k[n] denoting iLs impulse response, Shc>w, by verifying that eq. (P2.55-3) satisfies the difference equation (P2.55-

1), that the cespotise y[nl to an arbitrary input x{ri] is in fact giveji by the convolution sum

^ y\n] -

k[n- m]x[m].

m=- --

(P2.55-3)

^Hfire^weareusingfailOTialixjtaliun-- thatLB,^! = jt<t- IKi- 2) . <2KI),wheTe(]!isdefinedTub.: I

1

158

Linear Time-lnvarkan; Systems

Chap. 2

zH

x[nl

^[n} = Kfn] + 2Kin-1|

V[n]-^Vln-1]=7rn]

y[n}

(a)

xtn]

= w[nil - ^wln- 1] j([nl

wfn]

^nj = win] + 2w|n-1]

W

figure P2. 5 5

(d) Consider the LTl system initiaUy at rest and described by the difference^equa-
tjon

!^
x[nl

(P2.55~^)

Assuming that oq ^Q, what h yiO] if xln] = 5[/i]? U$ing this resuJt, speciiy
the bfomageneous eQuatiorL and initial conditions that the impulse respanse of the system must satiny.
Consider next the causal LTI systeoi described by die diflerence equation

t=0

t=0

{P2.55-5)

LH Express the impulse response of this system in terms of dial for the

system

described by eq. (P2.55-'i).

(e) There is an alternative method for detennining the impulse response of the LTI

system described by eq. (P2.55-5), Specifically, given the c&ndition of initial

= rest, i.e., in this case, y{-l^\ = y[-^ + 1] ^ ... = y[-ll

0, solve eq.

(P2.55-5) recursively whcifi x[n] - &[n}in order to determine yUS\,' . ^ . y[Ml

^ M? TVhal equation docs h{n\ satisfy for n

What arc the appropriate ittitial

couditjoiis for this equadon?
m (0 Using either of the inethads ouUined parts (d> and ie>, find the impulse re-

sponses of the causal LTI systems described by the following equations:

yM (i)

- y[n -2] = x[n]

(ii) y[n] - yin - 2] - x[n] + 2x[n - 1

(iu) y[n] - y[n - 2] = 2x[nJ - 3x[n - 4]

(iv) y[n] - (v3/2)>(n -\\ + \yin - 2) = x[n\

2^. It this problem, ^ve consider a procedure that is the continuaus-time counEerpart of

the technique developed in Problem 2.55. Again, we will see that the problem of

> M determining the impulse response h{i} for /

for an LTI systetn initially rest

and described by & linesi constant-coefhcient differetitial equation reduces to the

problem of solving the homogeneous equation with appropriate ifiitial <onditionsH

Chap.Z Prodtems

1S9

LH (a) Consider th&

system initially at rest and described by the differential equa-

tion

^+2>(r)- jt(0.

(P2.56-1)

-- Suppose that x(i) Sit). In order to determine the value of y(t) immeduneiy
after the application of the unit impulse, consider integrating eq. <P2.56-1) from
= = f 0~ to / Q* (i.e., from "just before" to '^ust after" the qaplicadon of the
impul^). This yields

y(0')->(0-> + 2[

y{T)dT^ \

S(T>rfT = 1.

Jo

(P2.56-2>

= < Since die system is itiitiahy at rest and x{t)

for f 0, y{^~ ) = 0. To satisfy

> eq. (P2.56-2) we must have >(0+) = L Thus, since x{t) - for r 0, the

impulse response of our system is the solution of the homogeneous differentia]

equation

^ + 2X0 =

with inidal condition

= 3^0"^)

1-

Solve this differential equation to obtain the iii^julse response h(f) for the sys-
tem. Check your result by showing that
+'^
f-
J-¨

satisfies eq, <P2.56-'l) for any input x{ty (b) To generalise the preceding argument, consider an LTI system initially at rest
and described by the differential equation

Xa,^=xU)

(P2.5^3>

with j(0 = 5(f> Assume the condidoncf initial rest, which, since jc(;) = Ofor
< f 0, implies that

y(0-) = ^(0-) = ...= ^JSTT^O") = 0.

(P2J6-4)

Tntegtate bodi sides of eq. (P2.56-3> once from r = 0" to ; = 0^, and use
eq. (P2.'^6-4) and an argument similar to that used in part (a) to show that the

160

Ui>eafTFn>9-lnvarJantSy3tams

Ghap- 2

resulting equation is satisfied with

^f"^> = S'''^'--=È^^¨^^-¯ (P2.56-5U)

and

Frt^-^2,

(P2,56-5fr)

Consequently, the system's impulse response for/ > can be obtained by solv
ing the homogen^cus equation

A^

rf*>(0
S^*^ ^r*

=

^-{J

with initial conditions given by eqs. (P2.55-5). (c) Consider novf the causaJ LTI system described by the differential equauon

'

(P2.56-6)

dtf^

t=0

Express the impulse response of this system in terms of that for the system of part (b). (Hint: Examine Figure P2.56.)

k=

df

v^t)
-^

y(t)
Figure P2.56

td) Apply the procedures outlined in pans (b) and (c) to find the impulse responses for the LTI systetns initially at rest and described by the following differential
equations:

^ 2^ (ii)

+

+ 2yis) - MO

M ^ m it) Use the r&sulb of parts (b) and (c) to dedu^^e that if

A' eq. fP2.56-6),

then the impulse response A(r) will contain singularity terms concentrated at

f = 0. In particular, h(t) will contain ^ term of the form

M-N

2^ arUrUX

where the a r are constants atwi the uM) are the singularity funt^tions defined in

Section 2,5.

(f) Find the impulse responses of tiie causal LTI systems described by the following

^ 3^ difTerential equariotis:

(X)

+ 2y(rj =

+ x{t)

.,

Chap-2 Problems

i&l

2*57. Consider a causal LTI system 5 whose input x[n] and output y[n\ ate related by th¨
difference equation

^ y[n]

- i^y[n ~ \]-^ byyx[n] + &i x{n -- \\.

(a> Verify that S may be considered a cascade connection of two causal LTI systems
Si and 5j with tha iollowing input-output relationship.

S] :y\[n] = bi)X\[n] + b\X\[n - I].

(b> Draw a hlock diagram Teprescntation of Ji (c) Draw a block diagram representation of hTi. (d) Draw a block diagram tepres&ntatifln of 5 as a cascade connection of ihe block
diagram representation of S\ foHowed by the block diagram representation
of Si-
(e) Draw a block diagram representation of S as a cascade connection of the block
diagram representation of Si followed by the block diagram representation
at Si.
(f) Show [hat the two unit-delay elements in the block diagrani representation of S obtained in part (e) may be cfillapsed into one unit-delay element. The resulting block diagram is referred to as a Direct Form //realization of 5, white the block diagrams obtained in parts (d) and (e) are referred to as Direct Form I
realisations of 5.
2,5ft* Consider a causal LTI system 5 whose input x[n] and output y[fi] are related by the
difference equation
2>'[nJ - y[n - IJ + y[n - 3] ^ - jc[n] 5x[n - A].
(a) Verify that 5 may be considered a cascade cotmection of two causa! Lr[ systetns
H^i and52 with thefoJlowing input-output reladonshipr
S, :2y,[^] = xi[n]-5xi[n-+],
52 : yiin] - ^y2[n - 1] - -yiin - 3J -i- xiM.
(b) Draw a block diagram representation of 5| <c> Draw 3 block diagram representation of lS^ . (d) Draw a block diagram representation of 5 as a cascade connection of the block
diagram representation of Si followed by the block diagram representation
Of 52.
(e) Draw a block diagram representation of 5 as a cascade connection of the block
tiagram representation of Sj followed by the block diagram representation of^t.
(f) Show that the four delay elements in the block diagram representation of 5 obtained in part (e) may be collapsed to thiee. The resulting block diagram is refecred to as a Ditecr Form II lealization of S, while the block diagrams obtained in parts (d) and (e> are referred to as Direct Form I realizations of 5,

,

.

1 62

Linear Time-lnvariafit Systems

Chap, 2

2,59. Consider a causal LTI system S wtw.se input j(r) and output y(0 are related by the
differencial equation

(a> Show that

dt

^ "'^'

' dT

v(0 = A \ yifydr + Bx(t) + cf ^(t)(/t.

J - :iz

JH

C and express rhe constants v4, B^ and in terms of the constants a^, Uf, fc^,
and />|,
w <b> She that 5 may be considered a cascade connect! on of the fo] lowing two causal
LTI systems;

(c) Draw a block diagram representation of 5i (d) Draw a block diagram representation of ^T. (e) Draw a block diagram representation of 5 as a cascade connection of the block
diagram representation of S\ followed by the block diagram representatiqn
(f> Draw a block diagram representation of 5 as a cascade connection of the block
diagram representaQoti of 52 followed by the block diagram of representation 5 1
(g) Show that the two integrators in your answer to flart (f) may be collapsed into
one. The resulting blcx;k diagram is referred to as a Direct Forfti II reahzation of S, while the block diagrams obtained in part?^ (e) and (f) are referred to as Direct Form I realizations ofS. 2.^4 Consider a causal LTI system S whose input jr(0 and output y(0 are related by the
differential liquation
''^~d^ 4-ai-^ + aoy(f) = f^j,(o^^i-^ ^^--^df~-
la) Show that
yit) ^ a{ y(T)dT^B\ i\ yiq^)dfy\dT -- T, \J --T,
H-C^CO + Z)j x{T)dt ^e\ \\ x{<r)diT\d7.

..

Chap. 2

Problems

163

C E and express the const*iixt*i A, B. D, and in terms of the constants ao, aj> ^2,
fro, fri^andii^'
(b) Show that S may be considered a cascade connection of the following two causal
LTI systems:

5, ; yi(0 = Cx^{t)^D\ j:|(t)Jt + È:

(c> Draw a block diagmm representation of 5i (d) Draw a block diagram representation of ^2 (e) Draw a block diagram ^presentation of 5 as a cascade connection of the block
diagram representation of S\ followed by the b\Qck. diagratn representation
of 5;,
(f) Draw a block diagram representation of 5 as a cascade connection of the block diagram representation of S2 ibliowed by the block diagram representation
ofS|.
(g> Sboiiv that Èbe four integrators in your answer 10 pan (f) tuay be collapsed into two. The resulting block diagram is referred to as a Direct Form 7/ realization of 5, while the block diagrams obtained iti parts (e) and (f) are referred to as Direct Form f Tealizadona of S.
EXTENSION PROBLEMS
2,61. (a) In the circuit shown in Figure P2.6l(a)^ x(t) i* the input voltage. The voltage >(0 across the capacitor is considered to be the system output.
L= 1H

(a)

Figure P2.6fa

(i) Determine the differential equatioi^ relating xit) and yUY
(ii) Sho\^ that the homogeneous solution of the differential equation from part
+ (i) has the form i:^^^'^'^ ifz^J"^^ Specify the values of <iii andiij^.
(iii) Show that, since the voltage and current arc restricted to be real, the natural
response of the system is sinusoidal.

1¨4

Linaar Time Invariant Systems

Chap. 2

(b> Tn the circuit shown in Figure P2.61(b>, x{t) is the input voltage. Ttie voltage y(r} acro^iK the capacitor is considered to be the system output.
JVVWW

(b)

Figure P2,6 1 b

(\) Determine the differeruial equation relating ;c(r) and y(J).
(ii) Show that ihe natur^ response of this system has the form Ke ~^^ and spec-
ify the value of a.
(c) In the circuit shown in Figure P2,6l(c), xU) is tiie input volt^ee. The voltage yU) acro&s the capacitor is considered to be the system output.

¨:!

figure P2. 61 c

(i) Determine the differenTiai equation relating j:(f) and yir)-
<ii) Show that the homogeneous solution of the differential equation from part (i) has the form e'^'iKieJ^^ + K2e~J^'},sai6 specify the value of a,
(ill) Show that, since the voltage and current are restricted to be rea^, the natural
response of the system is a decaying sinusoid,
2.62. (a) In the mechariical system shown in Figure P2.62(a), the force xij) applied to the mass represents the input, while the displacement y(t) of the mass represents the output. Determine the differential equation relating jt(0 and y{t}^ Show that the natural response of this system is periodic
(b) Consider Figure P2.62(b), in which the force x(t) is the input and the vebcity
yit] is the output. The mass of dte car is m, while the coefficient of kinetic Ac-
tion is p. Show that the natural response of this system decays with increasing
time,
(c) In the mechanical system shown in Figure P2.62{c\ the force xiO applied to the mass represents the input, while the displacement y(t) of the mass represents
the output.

Chap. 2

Problems

ifrs

K^2f*i^rn

m = 1 ,000 Kg
*>)

K ^ Spring constant ^ 2 N/m
m " Mass = 1 Kg
b = Oamping coifStant = 2 N-s/m

Fjgur? P2.62

(i) Determine the differentia] e<juation relating x(t) and yit).

(ii) Sho\^ ihat the homogeneous scrluCion of the differential equation ti^m part

(0 has the form f~¯^{È]e^' + È3^"^'}, and specify the value of a,

^ce (Lii) Show that,

the force and displacement are restricted to be tea]* the

natural response of the system is a decaying siausoid.

f66

Linear Time'ln/ariant Systems

Chap. 2

D 2.63. A $ 1 00,000 mortgage is to be retired by equal monthly payments of dollars. In-
terest^ compcmnded monthly, is charged ai the rale of 12% per annum on the unpaid
balance; for example, after the tiist month, the total debt equals

$100,000 + |~]S100.000 = $101,000.

D The problem is to determine such that after a specified time the mortgage is paid
in fuUn leaving a net balance of zero. (a) To set up the problem, let y[n] denote the unpaid balance after the/tth monthly
payment. Assume that the principal is borrowed in month and monthly payments begin in month 1. Show that y[n] satisfies the difference equation

y[n) - yy[n - 1] = -Z) n ^ \

(P2,63'n

with initial condition
>[0J = $100,000,
where -y is a constant. Determine y. Cb) Solve the difference equation of part (a) to determine
a y[n] for ^ a:

(HitiL^ The particular solution of cq. (P2.63-1) is a constant V. Find the value
K of and express y(nl for n > 1 as the sum of particular and hotnoget^eous
solutions. Determine the unknown constant in the homogeneous solution by
directly calculating y[lj from eq. (P2.63-n and comparing it to your solution.)
D (c) If the mortgage is to be retired in 30 years after 360 monthly payments of
dollars, determine the appropriate value of D.
(d) What is the total payment to the bank over the SO-year period?
(e) Why do banks make loans?
2*64, One iiuportani use of inverse systems is in situadons in which one wishes to remove
A distortions of some type. good example of this is the problem of removing echoes
from acoustic signals. For example, if an auditoriurn has a perceptible echo, then an initial acoustic impulse will be followed by attenuated versions of the sound ar regularly spaced intervals. Consequently, an often -used model for this phenomenon is an LTT system v^ith an impulse response consisting of a train of impulses, ke.£

hit) = 2^/i^6(f-Jtr).

(P2 64^1)

Here the echoes occur T seconds apart, and /iji representi; the gain factor oti the jtth

echo resulting from an initial acoustic impulse.

(a) Suppose th^ Mt) represents the original a<;oustic signal (the music produced

by an orchestra, for example) and that y{r) = T(r) * hit) is the actual signal that

is heard if no processmg is done to remove the echoes. In order to remove the

distortion introduced by the echoes, assume that a microphone is used to sense

We y{T} and that the resulting signal is transduced into an electrical signal.

will

Chap. 2

Proft'ems

167

also use yU) ttj denote this signal, aj* it represents the electrical equivalent of
the ^ous^tic signal, and we can go from one to the other via atoustic-electrit."Eil
conversion systems.
The Lrapottant point to note is that the system with impulse response given by eq. (P2.64-1) is invertihle. Therefore, we csui find an LTI system widi im-
pulse response gis) such that

= y(t) * f({t)

jkH),

and thus, by processing the electrical signal y{t) fn this fa^hicn and then con-
verting back to an acoustic signal^ we can remove the troublesome echoes. The required tnipulse response f^t) is also an impulse train:
DO

to

Determine the algebraic equations that the successive gt, must satisfy, and iolve

these equations for ga, g\^ and gi in terms of Ai,

^ ^ = = (b) Suppose that /to

1i '^i

l/^> and h^

ftir all i

2 What is git) in this

case?
A (cj good model for the generation of echoes is illustrated in Hgure P2.64. Hence,

each successive echo represents :i fed-back version of yit), delayed by T sec-

< < onds and scaled by a. Typically,

a 1, ^s successive echoes are attenu-

ated.

-*-m

T F^une P2,64

(i) What is the impulse response of this system'' (Assume initial rest, i.e.,

< Mn = }<r)

for r

if

< = for / 0.)

a < > (ii) Sh£w that the system is stable iiO <

1 and unstable if a 1.

(iii) What is ^(0 in this ca^se? Construct a realization of the inverse system

using adders, coefficient multipliers, and T-second delay elements.

{d) Althonghue have phrased the preceding discussion in terms of continuous-time

systems because of the application we have been considering, the same general

ideiii hold in discrete invie. That is, the LTi system with impure response

is invertible and has as; iLs inverse an LTI sysiem with impulse response
It
i=0

i^a

Linear Tirne-inviriarTt Systems

Chap. 2

It is nol difficult to check Jiat the g, satisfy the same algebraic equations as ir
part (a).
Consider now the di^rete-time LTI system with impulse respoDi>e

^ = /r[n]

Sin- kNl

This system i^not invertibJe. Find two inputs that produce the same output.
2*65, In Problem L.45, we introduced and examined some of the basic properties of cor-
relation functions for continuous-time signals. The discrete-time counterpart of the correlation function has ess^nti^ly the same properties as those in continuous tinier and both are esiremely imponant in numerous applicaUcms (as is discussed inPrc*lems 2.66 and 2,67), Jn this problem, we introduce the discrete-time currclation function and examine several more of its properties.
Ltt xiri\ and yYn\ be two real-valued discietc-time signals. The autocorrelit-
tion fmictit?n^ <^t([TMJ a*^^ *^vv["] of Jf[nl and y{r(\, respectively, are defined by the expressions
t^
^j,xln\ = 2^ x[m + nUlm]
and
*^

and the cmss-correlatitm Junctions are given by

2 4w J -I-
^^A^i] =

+ n]y\.n]

'and +'^

As in continuous time, these functions possess certain symmetry properties. Specif ically, (^Tr[rtl and ^n.[rtl are even functions, while ^,,[n] - (t>^,{-n]. (aj Compute the autocorrelation sequences for the signals Jr|[n], t:^[n], j^[n;, and
jci[tt] depicted in Figure P2.65,
(b) Compute the cross-correlation sequences

i^ <Ar,..,["].

J, Lj = 1,2,3,4,

fcifJChtr^], i = U 2. 5,4, as ^ht^v/n in Figure P2.65.
(c) Let x\ n] be the input to an LTI sy stem with unit sample respe nse n /i [ ] , and let the corresponding output be y[;?l. Find expressions for ^^^n] and t^.vh] i" terms
of <^iitri] and h\fi\. Show how c^iL^n] and (^wlral can be viewed as the output

Crtap. 2

Pfoblems

^t t

J(i [n]

I

-- --'

12 > * * '

'¨
3

169

-- * *

*'

I

' t

**

92 italnj

ir

-1

1

x^[n]

J

r

Figure P2.6S

of LTI sysifitns with ^xx\n] as the Input. (Do this by cxpUcitly specifying (he impulse r^ponse cf each of the two systems^)
(d) Let h[n] = xi [n] in Figure P2.65, and let y[n] be the output of the LTI system with impulse response h\n] when the input 4"! ^so equals JCit"]- Calculate
fl>xy[ri\ and (^^^[j^] using che results of patt (c).
2jS** Let hi(t), /12(f), and A^tO. as sketched in Figure P2.66, be (be impulse lespooses
of flinse LTI systems. These three signals are known &s Walsh juTictions and are of considerable practical importance because they can be easily generated by digital logic circuitry and because multiplication by each of them can be implem^ted in a simple fashion by a poLarity-reversing switch.

hi(t)

h?(t)

h#

1

1

'

1

1

pp,

12

34 t

1

23

AA t

-1

-1 -

-1 --

Figure P2.66

(a) Determine and sketch a choice for x\ {t\ a continuous-tinw signal with the fol-

lowing properties;

<i) A|(/)isreaL

(ii) Xiit) = Oforf <0.

^ (iii) \xi{t)\ :^ Ifor^

0.

= (iv) yj it) = X}it) * h(i) is as large as possible at f 4. (b) Repeat part (a) for X2{J) and x^it) by making >^(0 - xiit) * ft^CO and yz{t} -
= X3(t) * hiit) each as large as possible at f 4,

(c) What is the value af

^ ^ at time f 4 for i, ^

1, 2, 3?

no

Linear Tlme-fnvariant Systems

Chap. 2

The systfim with impulse r&spon,se /ij(0 is known as the ftuirthetl filter
for the signal ^^(0 because the impulse resptmse is tuned to x,{f) in order to
proJut;t: the majtinium output signal. In the next problem, we relate the concept
of a matched hlterto that of the t^iTrelation function foTContmuous-time signals.
2.67. The cross-corretat\on fuJ^cJion between two continuOLLK-time real signals A(r> and
v(0 is

(P267-t)

The Ltuioconvtauon junction of a signal xU) is obtained bv j.etlin^ v(j*) ^ r(f> in
cq. (P2.67-1).

rt

^^ J'> =

x\t -hT).i(T></T,

I

(a) Compute th^ (autocorrelation function fore^chof the two signals x\\t) and x^ii)
depicted in Figure P2.67(a),

^i{t)
1^

itjd)
Fb 12 3 4
-1

Xo(t)

a)
'(lo)

y

1

1

1

23

4

1

J

1

1

?

34

t

1

(b)

Figure P2.67

-- <b) Let A(n be a given s]gnai, and assume that x{j) is of finite dur^ition i.e,, that

< x{t] ^ for r

and / > T. Find the impulse response of ^in LTl system so

that (^i f(J - 7") is the outptit if xit) is the inptit.

(c) The system doiermir.ed in part (b) is a tnairhed jii^er for the signyl \{r) That
m this definition of a matched filter is idtntica] tu the H?ne introduced Problem

2,66 can be seen fronn the ftsllowing:

Chap. 2

Problems

171

Let x(t) be as in part (bX and let yit) denote the response to j(/) of an
< LTl system with real impulse response h(t). Assume that h(i) = f(?r r and for t > r. Show that the choice for hit) that maximizes y(T}, subject to the
constrainL that

h^U)d! = M, a fixed positive number,
Jo

(P2.67-2)

is a scalar multiple of the impulse response determine in part \h)- [Hint:
Schwartz's inequality states that

^ H(i)vit)dt
h

1/2 r

^

nl/2

v.^2irydt

for any two signals u{f} and v(t). Use this to obtain a bound on y(T).] (d) The constraint given by eq. (P2,67-2) simpiy provides a scaling to the impulse
M response, as increasing merely changes the scalar multiplier mentioned in
part (c). Thus, we see that the particular choice for hU) in parts {b) and (c) i^ matched to the signal x{t) ta produce maximum output. Thi*i is an extremeiy important property in a number of applications, as ive will now indicate.
In conununication problems^ one often wishe;^ to transmit one of a small number of pos&ibLe pieces of infoEmation. For example, cf a complex message
is encoded into a sequence of binary digits, wccan imagine a system that trans-
mits the information bit by bit. Each bit c a^i then be transmitted by sending one signal, say, xt,(t) , if the bit is a 0, or a different signal ^,(0 if a 1 is to be com municated. In this case, the receiving system for these signals must be capable of reco^izing whether xty(t)0T j] it) has been received. Intuitively, what makes sense is to have two systems in the receiver, one tuned to jcqU) and one tuned
t& X)\t)^ where, by "tuned," we mean tiiat the system gives a large output afier
the signal to which it is tuned is received. The property of producing a large output when a paiticuJar signal is received is exactly what the matched filter
posse-vses.
In practice, there is always distortion and interference in the transmission
and reception processes. Consequently, we want to maximize the difference be-
tween the response of a matched filter to the input to which it is matched and the response of the filter to one of the other signals that can be transmitted. To illustrate this point, consider the two signals Xf)(t) and xid) depicted in Figure P2.67(b). Let Zfl denote the matched filter for X(,it), and let L| denote the matched filter for xi{t).
(i) Sketch the responses of Lt) to xo(.r) and Jf] (/). Do di¨ same fi>r L^,
(ii) Compare the values of these responses at f -- 4. How might you modify
;jfrh(0 so that the receiver would have an even easier job of distinguishmg between X[)(i) and X[(r) in that the response of Èo to x^U} and L[ to x^it)
would bodi be zero at r - 4?
2,68. Another application in which matched filters and correlation functions play an im^ pottant roie is radar systems. The underlying principle of radar is chat an electro-

1 72

Linear Time-lmfariat^t Systems

Chap. 2

magnetic pulse iransmitled at a target will be reflected by ihe target and will subse-
quentl}! return to the setider with a deLay proportiotiaL to the distance to the target Ideally, the received signal will simply be a shifted and possibly scaled version of the original transmitted signal.
Let pit) he the oiigiti^ pulse that is sent out. Show chat
i^fiftiO) =-. m'Ax^,fy(t).

That is. (I?f,f,{{i) is the largest value taken by <fif,f,ity Use this equation to deduce that^ if the waveftirm that comes back to the sender is

= xir) apiT - fn)-

where or ik a. positive constant^ then

= <l>,f,(h)

maxi^.pC/).

{Hint: Use Schwartz's inequality.)
Thus, the way in which simple radar ranging systems work is based nn u^iing a
niatched filler for [he transmitted waveform p{f) and noting the time at which the
output of this system reaches iLs maximum value,
1^9. In Section 2.5, we characterized the unit doublet through the equation

for any signal x(t). From this equatif^n^ we derived the relationship

5(T)wi{T)rfT - -^'(01.
I

<P2.69-2)

(a) Show that eq. (P2-69-2) is an equivalent characierization of U] fs) by sliowing

that eq. (P2.69-2) implies eq. (P2.69-1 ). [Hint; Fix ^ and define the signal

= - g{r\

jc(r

T).]

Thus, we have seen that characterizing the unit impulse or unit doublet

by how it behaves under convolution is equivalent lo characterizing how it be-

haves under ititegration when multiplied by an arbitrary signal j^U). In fact, a&

indicated in Section 2.5, the equivalence of these operational definitions holds

for all signals at^l, in particular, for all singularity functions.
(b) Let fit) be a given signal. Show that

/(f)¨i<0= /(0)¨,</)-/'(0>6(0

by showing that both functions have" the same operational definitions. (c) What is the value of

xi7)u2iT)dr?

Fi nd an expression for fit) uj U ) an alogous to that in part (b) for f{t)u^if)

--

Ch3f>. 2

Problems

T73

2.70, In analogy with continuous-tinie singularity ftmcbons, we can define a set of
dificrete-tiiDe sigjialj. Specifically, let

and and define
^tnd
Note thar

Miln] = 5[rt]-5[/f- 11

;t times

^ '^

V
\it\ times

--'

'

x[n]*Sin\ = x[nl

and <a) What is

(b) Show that

= - x[n]m[n]

- Jf[0]H|[¨] - [;c[lj

x[0]]S[tt

I]

- -Ë[l]K([n] - Ufl] - T[0]36[n].

(c) Sketch the signals U2[n] and u^[n].
(d) Sketch u-An] and m-^[a].
(e) Show that, in general, for k>0.

" - "*^'''

)?^^^"J - u[r - Jt
nl(ifc^in"

1]],

(P2.70-1)

h (Hint: Use induction. Fnjm pan (c). it

evident that Uf,[n] satisfies eq,

<P2.7fKl) for k = 2 and 3. Then, a&suming that eq. (P2J0-1) satisfies u^lrt],

write ut+i[n] in terms of Ujt[rt], and show that the equation also satisfies

¨t^i[rt].)

.

174
> {) Show thai, in general, fori (},

Linear Time- Invariant Systems

Chap. 2

(P2.70-2)

(Hint: Again, use induction. Note that

n a u + ij("l Unft^jhl'!-

= w-ilrt].

(P2.70-3]

Then.assumingthateq. (P2J0-2)is valid for w. jt!rt]^usecq4P2.70-3)t(jshow

thateq. (P2.70-2) is valid for u ii^ij[n] as wellj

2,71.

In this chapter, we have used several properties and iJea.s that grcatly facilitate ihe analysis of LTl systems. Among these are two that wt wLih to examine a bit more dtjseiy. As we Avill see, in certain very special cases one must he careful in using

these prt^perties. which otherwise hold wiihout qualification,
(a) One of the basic and most important properties of convolution (in both continuous and discrete time) is associativity. That is. if x{0. hU), and gUy are three
signals, Ihen

j(/)*[jg(0*/!(Ol = [x{n^M^t)]*h(f) - [x(r)*hit)\*xVl

(P271-h

This relationship holds as long as all three expressions are well defined and
finite. As that is usually the case in practice, we will in general use the asso-
ciativity property without comments or assumptions. However, there are some cases in which it does not hold. For example, consider the system depn;ted in
Figure PZ. 71, with /!(0 = H|(Oand^'(0 = u(f)' Compute the response of thi^
sy^^tem to the input

^ xiti

1 for all /.

m

g{t)

y(t}

K{t)

g(t)

m *-m
Figure PZ.71

Do th i s in the three d i fferen t ways sug ges ted b y eq, ( P2 .7 1 - 1 } and b> the fi gure (i) By hrsi convolving the two impulse responses and then convolving the result
with JcU).
(ii) By first convolving xd) with ul(/) and then convolving the result with u{i). (iiil 8y first convolving Mf) with u(Oand then convolving the result with Hi^f^

Chap. 2

Problems

175

{\>) Repeal part (a> for and
(c) Do the same for

= xi.t)

e-

= h{t)

 '¨(/),

J?(0 ^ M (0+¨(rX

ˋ" = x[Ty] .

h[n] =

u[n],

BM 5[¨] =

- i^I" - IL

Thus, in general, the associativity property of convolution holds if and

m^e only if the three expressions in tq. (P2,71-^)

sense (i.e., if and only if

their interpretations in terms of LTE systems are meaningful). For example, in

part (a) differentiating a constant and then integrating makes sense, but the

= -^ process of integrating the constant from t

and then differentiating does

not, and it is only in such cases that associativity breaks down.

Closely related to the fotegning discussion is an issue involving inverse
systems. Consider the LTI system with impulse response h(T\ = uit)- As we
-- -- saw in part (a)> there are inputs specifically, x(t) = nonzero constant for

which the output of this system is infinite, and dius, it is meaningless to consider

the question of inverting such outputs tc recover the input. However, if we limit

ourselves to inputs that do yield finite outputs, that is, inputs which satisf>

1
x{T)dT <^.

(P2.71^2)

then the system is invertible, and the LTI system ^vith impulse re-iponse U[(r)
is iLs inverse,
(d) Show that the LTI system witit impulse response Ui (0 is noi invertible (JJint:
Find two different inputs that both yield zero output for alt time.) However,
show that the system is invertible if we limit ourselves to inputs that satisfy eq. (P2.71-2). [Hint: In Problem 1.44, we showed that an LTI system is avertible if no input other than xU) = yields an output that is zero for all time, are
there two inputs x{t) that satisfy eq. (P2.71-2) and that yield identically zero
responses when convolved with ui(j)?] Wliat we have illustrated in this problem is the following:
(1) If j((tl HitX and ^(f) are three signals, and if x{t) * gijX xU) h hiiX and
AC/) *^(/) are all well defined and'fimte, then tha associativity propeny, eq. (P2,71-1>, holds.

1 76

Linear Time- Invariant Systetris

Chap. 2

(2) Let hit) be the impulse response of an LTl system^ and suppose that ;he impulse response ^(0 &f a second system has the prapertj'

Ht)*g{t) - S{T).

tP2 71-3)

Then, from [IXfor all inputs jc(t) for which x{t> * ^(0 and Mi) + ^(0 are both weJJ defined and finite, the iWQ cascades of systems depicted ir Fig-
ure P2,71 act as the identity syKtexn, and thus, the two LTl systems can bt regarded as inverses of one another For example, if h{f} = w(r) and
g(f) = W]{0, then, as bug as we restrict ourselves lo inpiits satisfying cq. (P2.71-2), we can regard these two systems as inverses.

Therefore, we see that the associativity property of eq. CP2.71-1 ) dnd the definition
ofLTl inverses 4s given in eq. (P2,7 1-3) are valid, as long as all convolutions that are
involved are finite. As this is certainly the case in any reaMstic problem, we will in general use these properties without comment or qu^ifieation. Note that, althuugh we have phrased most ol our discussion in terms of continuous-lime signals and systems, the ^ame points can also he made in discrete time [as should be evident
from part (c)).

< 2,72, Let S\{l) denote the rectangular pulse of height ^ for

f =5; A, Verify that

2 J3* Show by induction that

t^-'
{k - 1>!

3
Fourier SERIES
REPRESENTATION OF
PERIODIC SIGNALS

3,0 flMTRODUCnON

The representation and analysis of LTT systems through the convolution sum as developed

in Chapter 2 is based on representing ^gnals as linear combin^om of shifted impulses.

In this and the foUowirig two chapters, we explore an alternative representation for signals

and LTI systems. As in Chapter 2, the starting point for our discussion is the development

of a representation of signals a5 hnear combinations of a set of basic signals. For this

alternative representation we use complex exponentials. The resulting representations arc known as the continuous'time and discrete-time Fourier series and transform. As we will

see, these can be used to construct broad and useful classes of signals.
We then proceed as wc did in Chapter 2. That is^ because of the superposiuon prop^

erty, the respon se of an LIT system to any input consisting of a linear combination of basi c

signals is the same 1 inear combination of the indivi^hial responses to each of the basic sig-

nals. In Chapter 2, these responses were all shifted versions of the unit impulse response,

leading to the convolution SLiin or integral. As we wiU find in the current chapter, the re-

LH sponse of an

system to a complex exponential also has a particularly simple form,

which then provides us with another convenient representation for LTI systems and with

another way in which to analyse these systems and gain insight into their properties.

In this ch^er, we focus on the representation of continiicjus-time and discrete-time

periodic signals referred to as the Fourier series. In Chapters 4 and 5, we extend the anal-

ysis CO the Fourier transform representation of broad classes of aperiodic, finite energy

signals. Together, these representations provide one of the most powerful and important

sets of tools and insights for analysing, designing, and underst^ding signals and LTI sys-
tems, and we devote considerable auention in this and subsequent chapters to exploring

the uses of Fourier methods.

177

1 76

Founer Series Representation of Periodjo Signals

Chap 3

Wle begia in the next section with a brief historical perspective in order to provide
^me insight into the concepts and issues that we develop in moFC deiatl in the sections
and chapters thaJ: follow.

3,1 A HrSTOniCAL PERSPECTIVE

The development of Fourier analysis has a long history involving a great many individuaJs and the investigation of many different pliysical phenomena.^ Tlie concept of using
-- *trigonometric sums" that h, sums of harmonicall> related sines and cosines or periodic
complex exponentials-- to describe periwiic; phenomena goes back at least as far as the Babylonians, who used ideas of this type in order to predict astronomical events,^ The
modem history of the subject begins in 174-8 with L. Euler, whe examined the motion of
a. vibrating string. In Figure 3.1, we ha\e indicated the fli^t few of what are known as the "normal modes" of such ¨ strir^g. If we consider the vertical deflection fit, x) of the
string at time t and at a distance jf along the string, tlien for any fixed instant of time, the
norma] modes are harmonijcaLLy related sinusoidal fuiictions of x^ What Eulcr ivoted was that if the contiguration of a vibrating string at some point in time is a linear combination
of these normal modes, so is the configuration at any subsequent bme. Furthemiore, Euler showed that one could calculate the coefficients for the linear combination at the later time in a very straightforward manner from the coefficients at the earlier time. In doing thi^,
Euter performed the same type of calculation as we will in the next section in <ieriving
one of the properties of trigonometric sums that make them so useful for the analysis of
LIT systems. Specifically, we will see that if the input to an LTl system is expressed as a
linear combination of periodic complex exponentials or sinusoids, the output can also be expressed in this form, with coefficients that are related in a straightforward way to those
of the iflput.
The property described in the preceding paragraph would not be panicularly useful, unless It were true that a large class of interesting functions could be represented by linear combinations of complex exponentials. In the middle of the 13th century, this point was the .subject of heated debate. In 1753, D. Bernoulli argued on physical grounds that all physLcal motions of a string c&uld be represented t?y linear combinaticns of normal modes, but he did not pursiie this mathematically, and his ideai^ were net widely accepted. In fact, Euler himself discarded trigonometric series, and in 1759 J. L. Lagrange strongly criticiKed the use of trigonometric series in the examination of vibrating strings. His criticism was based on his own belief that it was impossible to represent signals with comers (i.e., with discontinuous slopss) uang trigonometric series. Since such a configuration arises from

' The hi^tnnca] materiil in thin chapter was taiLcn frcim the tollowiTig references' L Cmtran-Guiness,

Joseph Fourier, !768-}S30 (Cambridge, WA' The MTT PicSi, 1*7Z>; G. F. Simmon.^, I>iff^remiiil F.iiuatiims.

)Mih Appticatinns an4 Historical Nofes <New Yuri: McGraw-Hill Boot Company, J972)- C Lancio^. Di":-

cours^ Oft Fourier Series {Lxindizin^ Oliver and Boydn 1966); R. E. Edwards, Fourier Sfries- A Modi^m InJrc-

M duaion (Nrw Y^rfc: .Springer- Vtrlag. Ind ed.* 1970); and A, D. AlekSMvdwv, A. N. KoJmogfirov, ard

A.

H Livrenf frv, Mathetnaiics' TtsCtmfent, Methods, undMeaning. trai]s S. Gould, Wtl. II; trans. K. Hir^h. Vol

I[] (CambndEe, MA' The ttflTPftii, (969). Otlties^^Gxattan-Ciilness' vvoik uffers tlie must ccim ple^Le account

flfFogrier's life and cu'HtributiD'iis, Other references are cited in several plac^is in the chipter.

- H. Dym and h. P McKcan^ Fouri^ Series and ffttegmli (New York: Atademit; Pres*;, \9'}Z) Tliis

test and (he lUKjt of Siimnans cited in footn&te 1 also contain diix^uRsimu of the vihratitig- string problem and
m its role the dcvelflpineiit of Fourier inaly.'il!*.

Sec, 3.1

A Historical Persptdtive

Position along the string

Vertical detection t

t(t.x)

\

179

Fjgure 3. 1 Normal mod^ of 3 vi-
brating string. (Solid lines iridicate the
connguration of each of ^ese modes at some fixed instant of time, t-]
the pJucking £f a string (i.e., pulling it taut and then releasing it)> Lagrange argued that trigonometric series were of very limited use.
It was in this somewhat hostile and slM^ptical environment that Jean Baptiste Joseph
Fourier (Figure 3.2) presented his^ ideas half a century later. Fourier was bom on March
Figure 3.2 J^an BaptPSte Joseph Fourrer (picture from J. B J. Founer, O&uvresde founer, Vof. II (Parts.
GaiJthier-Villars et Fits, 1960)1.

--

leo

Fourier Series Representation of Periodic Spgnals

Chap 3

21, 176S. in Auxerne, France^ and by the time of his entrance into the contioversy con-
cerning trigonometric series, he had ah^ady had a lifetime of expenences. His many
-- ctintributions in paniculai, those concemed with the series and transforni that c;aiTy his -- naiTie are made even ndore impressive by the circimisiaTices under which he wT>rked
His revolutionary discoveries, although not completely appreciated during his own life-
tjtne, have had a major impact on the development of mathematics and have been and still are of greai importance in an extremely wide range of scientific And engiEieeririg disci-
plines.
In addition to hi& studies in tnathematics, Fourier led an active political life In facr,
during the years that followed the French Revolution^his activities almost iedio his downfall, as he narrowly avoided the guillotine on two separate occasions. Subsequently. Fotuier becamean associate of Napoleon Bonaparte, accompanied him on his expeditions toEgypl (during which time Fourier collectfed the information he would use later as the bisis for his treatiseii cm Egyptology), and in 1802 was appointed by Bonaparte to th^ position of prefect of a region of France centered in Grenoble. It was there, while serving as prefect, that Fourier developed his ideas on trigonometric series.
The physical motivadOTi for Fourier*s work was the phenomenon of heat propagation and diffusion. This in itself was a significant step in that niost previous research in mathematical physics had dealt with rational and celestial mechanics. By 1S07. Fourier had completed a work, Fourier had found ^ries of harmonically related sinusoids to be
useful in representing the temperature distribution through a body. In addition, he claimed that **any'' periodic signal could be represented by such a series. While his treatment of
this topic was significant, many of the basic ide^ behind it had been discovered by oth-
R ers. Also, Foinier*s mathematical argutnents were stili imprecise, and it remained for L.
Dirichlet in 1829 to provide precise condirions under which aperiodic signal could be represented by a Fourier series,^ Thus, Fourier did not actually contribute to the mathematical theory of Fourier series. However, he did have the clear insight to sec the potential for this
series representatior^ and it was to a great extent bis work and bis claims that spurred much
of the subsequent work on Fourier series. In addition, Fouriei look this typo of representa-
-- -- tion one very large step farther than any of his jwedecessors: He obtained a representadon
for aperiodic signals not as weighted sums of harmonically related sinusoid5 but as
weighted integrals of sinusoids that are not all harmonically related. It is this extension
from Fourier series to the Fourier integral or transform that is the focus of Chapters 4 and 5, Like the Fouriei series, the Fourier transform remains one of the most powerful tools for the analysis of LTl systems.
Four distmguished mathemaricians and scientists were appointed to examine the
-- 1807 paper of T^ourier. Three of the four S, F_ Lacroix, G. Monge, and P. S. de Laplace
were in favor of publication of the paper, but the fourth, J. L, Lagrange, remained adamant in rejecting trigonometric seriesn as he had done 50 years earlier. Because of Lagrange's vehement objections, Fourier's papor never appeared. After several other atten^ts to have his work accepted and published by the Instinit de France, Fouriei' undertook the writing of another version of h is work, wbi ch appeared as the text Thiorie analytique de la chaleurf'

^ Borti S . D- E^>i&>0Ji and A. L. Caiichy had obtained results about the convtrgcnce y f Fourier series l>efaTE

^ m 1 32^, but Dirichkt'^ woilt Tcpresented ^uch a ^ i^fitant t^iteDskm nf tt^n itsulij that he is uisually credited

witht toeing

faai to consider Fourier scries convergence ^ ngarcnns Aistiion,

^Stc J. B. J Fourier, The Atunlyticcti Theory afffeat^ Uflas. A. RBcqwi <New Ygdt [>ovei. I*55|

.

Sec. 3.1

A Historical Perspective

181

This book was published in 1822, 15 years after Fourier had first presei^te4 his results to
the fnstitut.
Toward the end of his lift Fourier received some of the recognition he deserved,
^ but the most significant tribute to him has been tl£e enormous impact of his work on
many disciplines widiin the fields of tnathetnadc!;^ science, and engineering. The theory
of integration, point-set topology, and eigenfunction expansions are just a few e^tamples of topics in rfiaiheTnatics that have their roots in the analysis of Fouriei series and integrals.^ Furthermore, in addition lo the <?riginal studies of vibr^on and heat diffusion^ there are numerous other problems in science and engineering in which sinusoidal signals, and therefore Fourier series and transforms, play an important role. For example, sinusoidal signals arise naturally in describing the motioTi of the planets and the periodic behavior of
the earth's climate. Alternating-current sources generate siniuoidal voltage^ and currents,
and, AS we will see, the tools of Fourier analysis enable us to analyze the response of an
LTl system, such as a circuit, to such sinusoidal inputs. Also, as illustrated in Figure 3.3, ^aves in the ocean consist of the linear combination of sinusoidal waves with diffeient spatial periods or wavelengthsr Signals transmitted by radio and television stations are sinusoidal in nature as well, and as a quick pemsal of any teuton Fourier analysis will show, the range of applications ir which sinusoitial signals arise and in which the tools of Fcurier analysis are us&ful extends far beyond these few c^amples.

Wauelenglh 150 ft Wa\felenghit 500 ft Waft^ength aoo ft

eoofi

SOOfl

" 150 ft

Figure 3.3 Ship encountering the superposition of three wave trains^ aach with a
different spatial period. When these waves reinforce one another, a very krge wave
can result. In more severe seas, d gjant wave Indicated by the dotted hrve could result. Whether such a reindorc^menk occurs at any location depends upor> the revive phases of the tOFTtponents that are superposed [Adapted from an illustration by P. MIot in 'Nightmare \A/a[ves Are All Too Real to Deepwaier Saihrs," by P. Britton, Smithsofiian
a (Fetjriiary 1976), pp. 64-65].
While many of the applications in the preceding paragraph, as well as the origiival work of Fourier and his contemporaries on problems of mathematical physics, focus on phenomena in continuous time, the tools of Fourier analysis for discrete-time signaJs and systems have their own distinct historical roots and equally rich set of applications. In par-
ticular, discrete-time concepts and methods are fundamental to the discipline of numerical analysis. Formulas for the proceisiog of discrete sets of data points to produce numerical approximations for interpolation, integration, and differentiation were being investigated as early as the time of Newton in the 1600s. In addition, the problem of predicting the motion of a heavenly body, given a sequence of observations of the body, spurred the
^ForiiMjre on the imp^acl of Fourier's work on matheniftLcs, see W. A, Coppei. "J. B Fourier--on the rH:cjMon flf HiÈ Tfti> Huitdrcdtti BLrthda/," Atnerican Matfi^Tnaiical Monthly ^ 7b ( 19G9), 46S-33

1 82

Fourier Series Repre^eatatior^ ot PeriO(JicSiGnal&

Chap. 3

investigation of harmonic time series in the 18tb and lyth centuries by eminent scientists

iinJ matheiiiaticiaiis, including Ga-us-s, ^nd thus provided a seconti setting in which much

of the initial work ivas done on discrete-time signals and systems.

InLhe mid-1960s an algorithm, now knownasthefastFourier transform^DrFFT, was

w^ introduced. Hxifi algorithm, which

mdependcntly discovered by Cooley and Tntey in

1965. also ha!^ a ctmsideraWe history and can, in faci, be found in Gauss' notebooks/'
What made its modem discovery sy important was the fact that the FFT proved to be

perfectly suited for efficient digital implementation, and it reduced the time required to

compute transforms by orders of magnitude. With this t<xjl, many interesting but previ-

ously impractJc^ idea*; utilizing the discrete-time Fourier series and transform suddenly

became practical, and the development of discrete-time signal and system analysis techniques moved forward at an accelerated pace.

What has emerged nut of this long history is a powerful and cohesive frannework for

the analysis of coTitinuous-time and discrete-time signals andsystems and an extraordinar-

ily broad array of existing and potential apphcadons. In this and the foll<ming chapters,

we will develop the basic tools of that framework and examme some of its important im-

plications.

3.2 THE RESPONSE OF LTI SYSTEMS TO COMPLEX EXPONEIMTtALS

As we indicated in Section 3,0, it is advantageous in the study of LTI systems to represent
signals as linear combinations of basit; signals that possess the following two properties:

1* The set of basic signals can be used to construct a broad and useful olass of signals,
2, The response of an LTI system to each signal should be simple enough in structure
to provide us with a convenient representation for the response of the systern to any signal constructed as a linear combination of the basic signals.

Much of the importance of Fourier analysis results from the fact thai bmh of these prop-

erties are provided by the set of complex exponential sigi^als in contiguous and discrete
time--i.e., signals of the form e^' in conrinuous time and z'^ in discrete time, where s and

z are complex numbers. In subsequent sections of this and the following two chapters,
we will examine the Jirst property in *ome detail In this section, we focus on the second

property and, in this way, provide motivation fur the use of Fouriei series and transfomis

in the analysis of LTI systems.

The importance of complex exponentials in the study of LTI systems stems from the

fact that the response of an LTI system to a complex exponential input is the same complex

exponential with only a change in amplitude; diat is,

-- continuous dme: e'' * H[s)e''\ -- discrete time: -!" > H{z)^,

(3,1)
0.2>

HU) whftre the complex ampliLude factor

or R{z) will in general be a function of the

A complex variable .v or z. signal for which the system output is a (pos.sibly complex)

*M md T. Hei(lenii.ati, D. H. Johnson, and C- S. Bumts, "Gau-is

the His-torv of the Fisi Fouoicr Trans-

form," The IEEE ASSF Magazine I { 19lt4>, pp. 14-2 J.

,

Seo. 3.2

TTie Response of LTI Systems to CompfsK Exponentials

fas

constant times the input is referred to as sni^igepfiAnction of the: system, acid the amplitude
factor Ls referred to as the system's eigenvalue.
To show that complex exponentials are imlecd eigenfivtictiims of LTl systems. Let us consider a coiitimjoiis-time LTI system with impulse response h{t). For an input x{tX we
can dcterminethcoutputthioiightheoseoftheconvolutionmtcgral, so that with jcto = **^'

y(f) = [ h(T)x(t-T}dr

Expressing e^^' ^^ as e'^e^^'^, and noting that e^' can be moved outside the integral, we see
that eq, (3.3) becomes

y(0 = e"' j

h{T^e '^ dr.

(3.4)

Assuming that the integral on the right-hand side of eq. (3.4) converges^ the resptiiise to e'" is of the form

where H\s) is a complex constant whose value depends on s and which is related to the system tmpuise response by

His) = \ hir}e~'^dT.

06]

Hence, -we have shown that complex exponentials are eigenfunctions of LTi systems. The
coastani H(s) for a specific value of s is then the eigenvalue associated with the eigen-
funclitin f *'
In an exactly parallel manner, we can show that complex exponencial sequences are
eigenfunctions of discrete-time LTI systems. That is, suppose that an LTI system with impulse response h[n] has as it^ input the sequence

x[n] = z\

(3.7)

where ^ is a complex number. Then the output of the system can be deteimiued from the convolviti^>n sum aji

jl= -co

i

1-^

-I--*

(3.8)

i:- -^

A= -^

xM From diis expression, we see that if the input

is the complex exponential given by

eq. (3.7), then, assuming that the summation on the right-hand side of eq. (3 .8) converges,

the output is die same complex exporential multipUed by a constant that depends on the

1 84 value of r That is, where

Fourier Senes PepresentatJon q1 Periodic Sigr^als

Chap, 3

y[fi\ = Hizn''.

0.9}

Consequently^ as in the continuous-lime case, complex exponentials are eigen functions of discrete-lime LTI sysleitis. The constant f/(z) for a specified value of z is the eigenvalue
associated with the cigenfimction z".
For the analysis of LTI systems^ the usefulness of decotnposing more general signals in terms of eigenfmictions can be seen from an eiatnple. Le\ x(t) coire^wnd to a linear combination of three complex exponentials; that is.

From the eigenfunction proporty. the response to each separately is
--
a^e"'' * a:/f(s2)f^^^
and from the superp&sition property the response to the sum is the sam of the responses,
so that

More generally, in continuoiL^ time, eq, (35), together with the suporpositiou property, implies that the representation of signals as a linear eombioation of complex exponentials leads to a convenient expression for the response of an LTI system. Specifically, if the
input to a continuous -time LTI system is represented as a linear combination of complex
exponentials, that is, if

At) - X^****''

f^l^^

then the output will be

In an exactly analogous manner, if the input to a discrete- time LTT system is represented as a linear combination of complex exponentials, that is, if

x{n\ = J^Uizl,
k

(3.15)

then the output will be

yln] = ^aj,HiZi,}zl

(3.16)

--

Sec 3.2

The Response of LTI Systems lo Comple>t ExponenUals

185

Ij] other words, for boKb coTitinuous time and discrete time, if tlie input to an LT[ system is represen[ed as ii linear cumbiriiition tif complex ejtponeniials, then the output

can also be represented as a linear combination of the same complex exponential signals.

Each coefficient in this representation of the output is obtained as the product of the corre-

sponding coefficient a^ of the input and the system *s eigenvalue //(j^) or f/(^>)associiited

with the eigea function e""-' or ^, respectively. It was precisely thi& fact that Euler discov-

ered for thfi problem of die vibratiug strings that Gau^E and othei^ usid in the analysis

of time series, and that motivated Fonrier and others afierhim to consider the question
of how broad a class of signals could be represented as a linear combination of complex

e^tponentials. In the next few sections we examine this question for periodic signals, first

in continuous time and then in discrete time, and in Chapters 4 and 5 we consider the

extension of these rapresentations to aperiv>dic signals. Althmtgh in general, the variables

M s and z in eqs ( 3. 1

3- 1 6)

may

be

arbitrary

complex

numbers ,

Fourier anal ysis

in volves

restricting our attention to particular forms for these variables. In particular, in continuous
-- time we focus on purely imaginary values of j- = je.^.v jdt and thus, we consider onl>

-- -- complex exponeniiah of the form e'*^'r Similarly, in discrete time we restrict the range

of values of z vo thost ot unit magnitude

-- i.e., z

e^'^

&o thai we focus on complex

exponertials of the form f^*"".

ExarnpJe 3. f

As an jllustrationof eqs. (3.5) and (?,6), consider an LTL system for which the input xW]

and output yit) are relaied hy a time shift (A 3£ i.e.,

m = ^f-3).

(3.17)

^ If the input to this system is iht tumplex exponential signal x{i) tfJ^\ then, fmrn

= - y(t)

e'^'-^>

t--'"*^^^.

(3.18)

Equatjon (3. IB) ii in the forni of eq. (3,SJ.as we would expect, since e-'^' is an eigenfunction. The associated eigenvalue is HiJ2) = e J*, It is slraightf^jrward to ci^Dlirm
eq. (3.6) for this example. Specifically, fromeq. (^.17), the impul^je re^^poniie of the syis-
teni js /i(0 - ${t - 3) SubstKutmg into eq. (3.6). wc obtain

ms) = I È(T-3)e-''dT - e-^',

> - st>rhat/f(j2) f

As a second cxan^ple^ in this case illastrating eqs. (3-1 1 j and (3 1 2}, consider the

KO + input signal x<t) = tosC40 cmilt)- From eq. (3.17)h

will of tourse be

>(;> - cc^HMt - + 3)> a>s<7(f - 3£.

i3.l9)

To see that this wili also result fromeo. (3.12), we first expand J(:> Uiing EuLer's relation;

xO) -

ifJ-*' 4

+ + If-v^^

:,ei'"

1"-'^'.

{3.20)

Promeqs 0.11 J and (3,12),

--

166

Fourier Series Representation of Periodic Signals

Chip. 3

or

- i£s<4(/ - 3)) + cos(7(j - 3£.
For this simple enample, multiplication of each pericKlic exponential component of
-- -- xO) for example, ^e^"^ by the corresponding eigenvalue--e,g,, //ty4) = e ^'^
effectively causes the input componeni to shift in time hy 3. Obviouslj', in this case we can determine v(0 in cq, (3, 19) by inspccuon rather than by employing eqs- (3.1 1) and (3.12). However^ as we will see, the getiera] property embodied in eqs. (3.U) and (3. 1 2) not only allows us to calculate the responses of more complex LTI systems, but also provides the basis for the frequency domain representation and analysis of LTI
systems,

3.3 FOURJER SERIES REPRESENTATION OF CONTINUOUS-TIME
PERIODIC SIGNALS

3.3.1 Linear Combinations of Hannonicaliy Related Complex Exponentials
As defined iti Chapter 1, a signal is periodic if, for some positive value of 7",
xU) - x{t + r> for all/.

0^2])

The fundamental pericd of x(t) is the minimutn positive, nonzero value of T fnr which eq, (3.21) is satisfied, and the value wo = Itt/T is referred to ai the fundainental fre-
quency.
in Chapter 1 we also introduced two basic periodic signals^ the .sinusoidal signal

= ;ffr) cos^o'

(3.22)

and the periodic complex exponetitt^
x{T) = fJ^^

(3.23)

Both of these signals are periodic with fundamcnta] frequency (U[^ and fundamental period
T ^ 27r/*i>o. Associatod i^ith the signal in eq. <3.23) is the set. of harmnmLaily related
complex exponentials

= 4>t(.r) = e^^^*'

^J^*2^^^^

k = 0,ÝlÝZ....

(3.24)

Each of these signals ha^ a fundamental frequency that is a multiple of tuo, and therefore,
T each is periodic with period (althoiigh for \k\ ^ 2, die fundamental pcnod of ^^^(0 is a
fraction of T)r Thus, a linear combination of harmotiically related complex exponentials of the form

Set. 3,3

Fourier Series ftepresentatron of Continuous-Time Periodic Signals

1 87

IS aiso periodic with period T. In eq. (3,25), the tenn for ^ = Ls a constant. The lerms for
-- A = +1 and t = I both have fundamental fr&ciuency equal to tiio and are collectively

referred to as \he^ fimdamentai cotnponeats or tbe/irsr harmonic components. The two

+2 ^ termij for ^ =

and A

-- 2 are periodic with half die period <or, ecjuivalentlj, twice

the frequency} of the fundamental components and are referred to as the second harmonic

+N -N cfymponents. More genejally, the components fcr Jt =^

and k ^

are referred to as

the A^th harmonic components.

The representation of a periodic sigiul in the form of eq, (3. 25) is referred to as the

Fourier series representation. Before devel&piiig the properties of this represcniation, let

us consider an example.

Example 3.2

Consider a periodic signal x{i), with fundamental frequency 2ir, thar i^ expressed tn the form of eq, (3.25) a&

^ - J(/)

O;*^''^",

i= -3

(3,26)

-where

= Oil

L

1
fl] -a-, - -.

1

-- fl^

a

,

=

]
-,

Rewriting eq. (3.26) and collecting each of the harmonic componenis which have the
same fundamental frequency, w^ obtain

f5.27^

E<5uivaiently, using Euler's relation, we can write x{ti in the form

^0 =

1+

1
^ cos 2iri

+

cos 47rr

+

2 -

cos C£7r^

f5,2S£

In Figure 3.4, we illustrate graphically how the signal j;(/) is built up from its liannonic
components.

188

Fourier Series Representation of Penodic Sijnal^

Chap 3

^^n - 1

- Kitt) I COSEirt
aaAaa
Kj^t) = cos4Trt

x^) + X. it)
AA/V\A
Xo(J) + Xi{t> V X3(t)

Kjtt) = I COS Sirt

- + x(t)

Xfl(t) + i(,(t) -xed)

xgft)

Figure 3.4 Constfuction ot the signal y{t) ir Example 3.2 as a i near com-
bination of harmonic&tly related sinusoidal signals.

Equation [3,2^) is an exanipie of an altem^ive form for the Fourier series of real
periodic signals. SpecificaJlyj suppose that x{t) is real and can be represented in the form
of eq. (3.25). Then, since x'(t) = x{0^ we obtain

X x(0 =

<^"^*''"'-

k = -^

Sec 3.3

Fourier Senes Representation of Continuous-Time Penodrc Sign^s

1S9

Replacing t by -^ in the summation, we have

^ x{t) =

^-

which, by comparison with eq^ (3.25)> requires that a^ = tr* ^, or equivalently, that

a* =a-*^

(3.29)

Note that thisi is the case in Example 3.2, where the dft's are in fact real and fli - "aTo derive the alternative forms of the Fourieirseries> we first rearrange the summation
in eq. (3.25) as

Substituting oj for a-t from eq. (3.2% we obtain

Since the two terms inside the summation axe cotnplex conjugates of each other, this can be expressed as

IX.

X xin = oo +

2(R4^i^^^'='}.

= Jt

1

(3.30)

If

<! fc

is

espressed

in

pol *r

form

as

at, = As^e^^^

then eq. (3.30) becomes

lie

X x(f) = tio +

^^{J^ief^^'''^'^'*}

That is,

^2 + xO) = flf)

+ ^* cos(jta>of dk)

(3,31)

Equation (3.31) is one commonly encountered fonn for the Fotiricr series of real periodic signals in continuous time. Another fonn is obtained by writing a^ in rectangular form as

where Bt and Ct are both real. With this expression for djt. eq. (3.30) takes the form

x(t) ^ aii + 2^\Btcoskfi}(it-Ck^iTikiii{itl.

032)

= In Example 3.2 die flft*s are all real, so that af, = Ai^

Bt^ and therefore, beth represen-

tations, eqs. (3.31) and (3.32). reduce to the same form^ eq. (3.28),

] 90

Fourier Series RepresentatJcn of Periodic Sign^fs

Chap. 3

ThJjJi for real periodic functions, the Fourier series in terms of complex e?tponetitia]s> as given in eq. (3.25\ is mathematically equivalent to either of the two forms in eqs, (3,31) and <3.32) that use trigonometric functions. Although the latter two are coxmiion forms for Foiu-ier series/ the complex ex]X)net)tia] form of e^^, (3.25) is pctrticularly convenient for
our purposes, so we will use that form almost exclusively. Equation (3,29) lUtistrates one of many properties associate wilh Fourier series.
These properties are often quite useful in gaining insight and for computational purposes,
and in Section 3.5 wt collect together the mosr important of them. The derivation of several of them is considered in problems at the end of the chapter. In Section 43, we also will
develop the majoritv of the properties within the broader context of the Fouriei transform.

3.3.2 Determination of the Fourier Series Representation of a Continuous-time Periodic Signal

Assuming that a given periodic signaJ can he represented with the series of eq, (3.25), we

need a procedure for determining the coefficients a;. Multiplying both sides tif eq. (3.25)

^-j^*^t
\^y

i^e obtain

= Iniegrating both sides from to r

ZTriiii^, we have

t>

Jo ^T^,,

Here, T is the fundamental period of .v(0> and consequently, we are integrating over one
period. loterchanging the order of iniegraticin and summation yields

T

k"--.

D

(3.34)

The evaluation of the hfacketed integral is straightforward. Rewriting this integral ujjing
Euler's formula, we obtain

T

fJ

cT

s;<fr -iJ^n^^,
^ j
h Jo

[ cos(;:-rt)tuyfrff + j [ ^m{k-n)(fi^idi,
Jo

(3.35>

^ For k n, cos{ k -- n )co^i t and si n( i -- nWo' are pehodic sinusdids with fundamental period
iT/\k. - n|). Therefore, in eq. (3.35), we are integrating over an interval (of length T) that

is an integral number of periods of these signa]^. Since the integral may be viewed as

k^ measuring Uie total area undev the functions over the imewal we see that for

n, beth

of the integrals on the right-hand side of eq. (3.35) are zero. For t = n, the integrand on

tlte left-hand side of eq. (3.35) equals \, and thus, the integral equals T, Iti sum, we then

have

)

to, k^n'

^In feci, in his ong^nal worit. Fnurier used the s-ne-cusine fbim of the Founer ^riei ^ivcn in etf (i 32>

-

Sec 3.3

Fourier Seles R¨presenlation of Continue us-Tl me Pelodjc Signats

and conseqtienily, the right-hand side of cq. (3.34) reduces to Ta,,. Therefore,

i9i

' Jo

whic:h provides the equation for determining the coefficients. Furthermore, note that in
evaluating eq. (3.35), the only fact that we used concerning the intervai of integration was that we were integrating over an interval of length T, which is an inLegral numbcir of periods of cos(Jt - n>iJor and sin(t - n\at(it. Therefore, we will obtain the same result if we integrate over any interval of length T. That is, if we denote integration over any interval of length Tby Ij^ we have

^jtk-n^o' ^j -- T,

I\,r

{^.

k= n
kË= n

axid cOTisequcTitly,

^1 a. =

x(rV"^TM¯'rf^

(3J7)

To summarize, if x{t) has a Fourier series representation {i.e.£ if it can be expressed as a linear combination of hannonicaliy related complex exponentials in the form of eq. (3.25)], then the coefficients are given by eq. (3J7), This pau: of equations, then, defines
the Fourier scries of a periodic continuous-time signals

+^

i

Here, we have wdnen eqaLva]ent expressions for the Fourier series in terms of the fun
damnetal frequency cuo and the fundamental period T. Equation (3,3S) i^^ refetied to as the .synthesis equatit>n and eq. (3,39) as the anatyus equation. The set of coefficients {a^} are often called the Fourier senes coefficients or the spectral coefftctents of x(0.^ These complex coefhcienLs measure the portion of the signal x{t) that in at &ac!h haimonic of the
h fiindamental oomponent. The coefficient oc> is thedc or constant component of x{t) and
given by eq. (3.39) with jt = 0. That is,

^ flo -

x(i)dT,
j

(3.40J

which is simply the average value of jc(/) over one period.
Equations (3,38) and <3.39) were known to both Euler and Lagrange in the mid-
dle of the ISth cetitury. However, they discarded this line of analysis without having

The term "gpecU^ coefUJcltat^^ is derived t'mm pn>t>lcni>i such as the specnnscnpii; ckecomposidon of light into spectral hoes {Lt., uitu its eleirentary components atditfe:rejit rrequcncies i. Tht iatcasit^ uFaiiy hne in sui;h a dccumposition i.': adirect niie:asurÝof tbcFraciiuDof the total hght energy 9t the freqjency corresponditLe
to the- line.

1 ^2

FouHer Series neprasentaUon of Persic Signals

Chap, 3

examined the question of how kige a c:lass of penodic signals could, in fact, berepresraited

we in such a. fashion. Before

turn to this question in the ne^t section^ kt us iJlustr^ite the

continuous-time Foiuier seiieis byTncans of a few examples-

Example 33

Consider the stgnaL

whose fundamental frequeincy is w<h, Ooe approach to determinm^ Uie Fourier series coefficients for this signal is to apply eq. <3,39). Fof Uiis ^mple case, however, it is
eiasjcr to expand the sinusoidal sign^ as a linear combjnation of <X9mplex expODcDtlals aDd identify the Fourier series coefficientfi by inspeclion. Specifically, we can express

2/

2j

Coinpiaring the right-hand sides of this ^uation aAd eq. (.3.3K), ive -cibiain

I
2j
a* = 0,

1

2j

- k -^ -Ë \ oi

\.

Example 3,4

T j{0 = 1 +SiDWof + 2cOSCi>[>/ + COÈf2fdo^ "^ I'
which hÈis fuadameutal frequency aio. As with Èxample 3.3, we can again eipard xiO
direaly in terms of com^leit exponentials, so that

Collecting terms, we obtain

J^/) =

1

+ [l +

+ [l

Y^y^^'

-

^\e-^<'' +

+ ji|fJ<^^>]eJ^o^ fL-^("'^^]e-^^'.

Thus, th* Fourier series coefficient'; for ihi* example aje

1^
C2 - -^^t-^>= ^n+jx

.

Sac^ 3^3

fourier Series Representation of Continuous-Time Periodic Signals

= a > fli

[jt|

2.

In FlÈ|ii¨ 3.5^ we show a bar ^raph of the magnLtude and phase of djt

193

-3-2-1

T23

<atc

-- -- -- .

-2

*¨>

I

I '

1 >
I

I
1

a

-3 -1

23

Rgure 3.5 Plots of the magnitutte and phase of the fojiier CDefficients of
the sign^ considerst} In Bomple 3.4^

Example 3*5

The periodic square wave, sketched in Figure 3.6 and delined over cne period as

1-
Jt(0-
0,
_

M<7i

<< ^

Ti

|rl

T/2

(3,41)

IS a sLgiial that wc will encounter a numbei of tintes throughout this book. This signal is

periodic with fui^bmental period T and fundamental h^quency u>d = lirfT.

To determine the Fourier series coefficieDts for x{t\ wc use eq. (3.39). Because

^ < uf the ^ymiDetiy of x(,t) about f = D, it is conveuient to choose --Tfl

t Tfl as the

jifl)

j_n 'ZT

lJ L _T -T, T, T

2

E

L
2T

RguFv 3.& Periodic square wave.

1 94

Fo jrier Series Representation of Periodic Signals

Chap. 3

T interval over whtch the integratifin it, pefiormed, allbnugh any interval af lejigih ]s
.equiiUy v^lid and thus will lead to the s^mt result. Using Ihe^e limil'^of inlegnilion and substituting ftomeq. (3.41), we havp first, for ^ = 0^

41';. fi(]

= ?^.

^% menti^JEied previously^ rt^ is interpreted to be the average value of x{j>, -hvhitrh in thii esse equ^h the fraction of each period during which x(i) = I. For jt ?^ 0, we oblaLn

'

I

r Cj.i .r

r

-L

_ 1-_.L..J J

which we may rewrite as

kti3\\T

2J

(3 43)

m Noting that the tetm in brackets is sin icatnT\ . wc cnn express the coefficiems ^^

= = 2siTi<*:cJo7'i>

^^in(fay(lTll

^A

-,

=;

-, ,

KiaffT

Air

,^,,
k ^(i.

^ ^^^ f3.44)

*hete wt have used the fact ihat m,,! -- 2ir,
Figure 3.7 ts a bar graph of ihe Foiiner series coefllcienls for this example. In panitular. the coefficient*: are plotted for a fixed value of T] sind several values of T. For this specific example, ihe Fourier coefficients are real, and consequently^ they can
be depicted graphically with only a single graph. More generally, of course, the Fnurier
coefhcients anc ccimpleJt, so tlmt two gcaphs, corresponding to the real and iiwaginary
parts, or magnitude and phase, of each coefficient, would be required ForT = 4T,, r(0 i^asquare wave that isunity for half ihe period and zero for halfthe period. Inihijicaj^.
= of\tTi ir/2, and fromeq, 0.44).

Ok

=

sinf'n'jt/2)
j^;^.

k, ^i},.^

BA^)

while

= Ofk =

(1-46J

From eq. (3.45). Hs, = fork even and noozero. Also^ sir\{-7Tk/2) alternates be I ween t i
fOT successive Olid valuer of k. Thereff^re,

^ ii\

a

1

7t'

= a ^1

=^
-?,

i

a? ^

" '*

1

Sec. 3.4

Convergence trf th< Fourier Series

19B

T^ T

p2 2 1

I

'

ai

m- I -*-i^^-

"

L'J

1.JT\r

(b)

TT I

" -^ i'--8*

11 u

TT

(c)

Figure 3,7 Plots of the scaled FoMrier series coefficients ta^ far the pe-

= riodic square wave with 7*1 fixed ar>d for several values of T, {a) 1

AT^.

= ^oed [tf] T = BTi) {c) T

I57i The coefficients are regiiiarty

samples of

the Bnvebpe {2s\r\tjT^)iaf, wfvere the spadng between samples, Zw/T, de-

creases as r increases.

3.4 CONVERGENCE OF THE FOURIER SERIES
Although Eulfer and Lagrange would have been happy with the results of Examples 3.3 and 3.4, they would have objected to Example 3.5, since x(t) is diScontijiuous while each of its harmortic components is continuous. Fourier, on the other hand, considered the same e^^unpJe and maintained that the Fourier series representation of the square wave is vaJid. In fact, Fourier maintained that any periodic signal could be represented hy a Fourier series. Although this is not quite true, it is true that Fourier series can be used to represent an extremely large class of periodic sigtials^ including the square wave and all other pericolic signals with which we will be concern^ in this book and which ate of interest in practice.
To gain an understanding of the square-wave example and, more generally, of the question of the validity of Fourier series representations, let us examine the problem of approximating a given periodic signal Mt) by a linear combination of a finite number of
-- harmonically related complex exponentials that is, by a finite series of the fonn

196

Fourier Series Representation of Periods: Signals

Chap. 3

k=-N
Let ej^(t) denote the Approximation error; that h^
+^

In ordftc to deientvitie how good any particuiar appioximation is, we need to specify a
quantitative measure of the size of the approximatiot) error The ciit^non that v^e wiL] use
h the energy in the error over one period:

^1 È^

l^viOl^d/.

(3.49)

As shown in Problem 3,66, the particiilar choice for the coefficients in eg. (3.47) that minimize the energy in the error is

¯t= ^^ me-'*^"di.

(3.50)

Comparing eqs. (3.50) and (3.39), we see that eq. (3.50) is identical to Che expression used
to determine the Fourier series coefficients. Thus, if j(f) has a Fourier series representa-
tion, the best approximation using only a finite oumber of harmonicaLly related compleji exponentials is obtained by truncating the Fourier series to the desired number of terms.
N As increases, new terms are added and Efv decreases. Tf, in fact, xit) has a Fourier scries
¨ representation^ then the limit of Èjv as /V -+ is zero.
Let us turn now to the question of when s. periodic signal xiO does in fact have a Fourier series lepresentation. Of course, for any signal, we can artennpt to obtain a set of Fourier coefficients through the use of eq. (3.39). However, in some cases, the integral in eqn (3-39) niay diverge; that is, the value obtained for some of the a^ may be infinite Moreover, even if all of the coefficients obtained ftom eq. (3.39) arc finite, when these
coefficients are substituted into the synthesis equation (338), the resulting infinite series
rnay not convene to the original signal x{t}.
Fortunately, there are noconvergencedifficpltiesfbr taige classes of periedic signals. For example, every continuous periodic signal hns a Fourier series represent^ion for which
^ the energy Ejv in the approximation error approaches as goes to ¨. This is also true
for many discontinuous signals. Since we will find it very useful to include di^ontinuoua
signals such as s^uarc waves in our discuEsions, it is wonhwhile to investigate the issue of convergence in a bit more detail. Specifically, there are two somewhat different classes of conditions that a periodic signal can satisi^ to guarantee that it can be represented by a Fourier series. In discussing these, we will not attempt u> provide a complete mathematical justification; more rigorous treatments can be found in many texts on Fourier analysis.*

'See. for^Minple, R. V. Churchill^ Fourier Sfrie,i aiui Boatuiary VoiM Pfvbiems, 3rd cd. [Ucw VoA:
McCraw-HiJ] Book Company, 1978); W. Kaplan, Operatumat Meikodspr Lintar Sysffms (Reading, MA: Addison-WesleyPublisliir^ Company. 1962), and tlie bcxikby Dym and McKean refsKdced in footnutc 2 <?f
ihk chapter.

S¨c,3.4

Converoenoeoftfie Fourier Series

197

One cla^s of periodic signals that are rcpresentable through the Fourier series is those
signals which have finite enet^y over & single period* i.e., signal ^ for which

j(it)\^dt<^.
IT

(3.51)

When this condition is we satisfied^ are guaranteed that the coefficients nt obtained from

eq. (3.39) are finite. Furthertnore, let jCffiO. be the approximation to x(t} obtained by using

^ these coefficients for |jt|

/V:

2 = -<//(/)

fl^e^*"^

032)

Then we are guaranteed that the energy E^ in die afiproximation error, as defined in
N eq. (3,49}, converges to as we add more and more terms, i.e., a^ -£ ¨, That is, if
we define

2 ^(0 = j(0 -

aK^*"*^^

(3.53)

then

I \eU)fdt =0.

(3.54)

As we will see in an example at the end of 0ns section, eq. (3.54) does not imply that the
signal x(t) and its Fourier series representation

I-j:

* = --*

arc equal at every value of L What it does say is that there is no energy in their difference.

The type of convergence guaranteed when jr(0 has finite energy over a single pe-

md riod is quite useful. In this ca^e eq. (3.54) suites that die difference between x{t}

its

Fourier series representation has zero enei^y. Since physical systems respond to signal en -

ergy, ttom this perspective t(0 and its Fourier series representation are indistinguishable.

Because most of the periodic signals that we consider do have finite energy over a single

peried, they have Fourier series representations. Moreover, an altetiiadve set of conditions,
P developed by L, Dirichlet and also satisfied by essentially all of the signals with which we will be concerned, guarantees that x(t) equals its Fourier series representation, except

at isolated values of t for which x{0 is discontinuous* At these values, the infinite scries

of eq. (3.55) converges to the average of the values on either side of the discontinuity.

The Ehrichlet conditions are as follows;

Condition 1. Over any period, xU) must be absolutely inferrable:, that is,

|j(r)|Jf <:o. T

(3.56)

198

Fourie'Sflns^ Representation ot Periodic Signals

Chap. 3

As with square integrabilityj this guarantees that each coefficient at will be finite, since

So if

then

A penodic signal that violates the first Din chJet condition is x(0 = -, 0< f ^ 1;

that is, xU) is periodic with period 1. This signal is illustrated in Figure 3.8<a>,

Condition 2, In any finite interval of time, x{t) is of bounded variation; that is, there arc no more than a finite number of maxima and niinima during :iny single period of the
signal.
An exaiiipLe of a function [hat meets Condition 1 but not Condition 2 is

x{t) = sin|-- I 0</ ^ 1,

(3 57)

= as illustrated in Figure 3.tt{h). For this function, which is periodic with T

I,

Jo
The function has, however, an infinite number of maxima and minima in the intervaJ.

Coiiditloa3* Inasiy finite interval of ti.me> there are only a finite number of d^sconiinu-

b itits. Furthermore, each of these discontinuities finite.

An example of a function that violatet Condition 3 is illustrated in Figure 3.8(c). The

signal, of period 7* = S, isi composed of an infinite niunher of sections, each of which is

^d half the height

half the width of the previous section. Thus, the area under one period of

the function is clearly less than S. However^ ^ere are an infinite ntimber of di^ontinuities

in each periodn thereby violating Condition 3.
As can be seen from the examples ^ven in Figure 3.&, sigTials that do not satisfy

the Dirichlet conditions are generally pathologicaJ in nature and consequently do not

typically arise in practical contexts. For this reason, the question of the convei^ence of

Fourier series will not pi ay apanicularly significant rofe in the ren^ainder of the book. For

a periodic signal that has no discontinuities, the Fourier series representation converges

and equals the original signal at every value of t For a periodic signal with a finite number

of discontinuities in each period, the Fourier series representation equals tfie signal every-

Sec 3.4

Convergence of the Fourier Series

^(t)

1

1

2

t

(a)

199

(b5 K(t)
(c)

Figure 3.8 Signats trtat vidate the

Dirichlet conditions: {a) the signti

= < x(f)

IJt tor

^ ts 1, a peri-

odic signEd with period 1 [this signal

vioiatesthe first Dirichlet condition);

(b) the periodic signal of ¨q, (3.57),
which violates the second Dfrichiet

condition: (c| a signai periodic with

period 8 that violates the :hird Dirichlet

^ < condition [for

f 8, the value of

x{t) dEcr^ases l^y 3 factor of 2 when-

ever the distance frpm t to 3

decreases by a factor of 2; that is,

0^t<A^ 16

t

x{t) = ^,

= x{f)

1/2,

4 ^ r< e. x{t) = 1M, 6 ^ f<7.

^ f< x(t) - 1/8, 7

7.5, etc,].

when: except at ttie isolated points of discyntinuity, at which the series converges to the average value of the signal on either side of the discontinuity In this case the difference between the original signal and its Fourier series nepresentation contains no energy, and consequently, the two signals can be ihought of as being the same for all practice pur-

2C0

FcLirierSerias Representation of Peri adic Signals

Chap. 3

pttses. Specifically, .since the signals differ ojil> at isolated points, the integrals of txnb

sigrtiils over any im&rval are identical For this reason, the two signals behave identically

untler convuLution ajid tonsetiuently are identic^ from the standpwint of the analysis of

LTI systems.

To gain some additional understanding of how the Fotirier series converges for a

periodic signal with discontinuities, let us return to the example of a square wate. In

particular, in 1898,'^ an American physicist, Albert Michelson, constructed a harmonic

analyzer, a device that, for any periodic signal xit), would compute the truncated Fourier

series approximation of eq, (3.52) for values of A^up to 80. Michelson tested his device on
many lunctions, wilh the expected re&ult that jc^(r) looked very much like j(r). However^

when he tried the square v^ave, he obtained an important and, to him, very surprising re-

sui;. Michelson was concerned aboui the behavior he observed mrd thought that his <levLce

might have had a defect. He wrt;ie about the problem to the famous mathematical physicist

Josiah Gibbs, who investigated it and reported his explanation in 1S99,

What Michelson had observed i^ illustrated in Figure 3.9, where we have shown
N ^ Xf^S) *3r several values of lor x{t), a symmetrjt square wave {T ^T-^'). In each case,

the partial sum js superimposed on the original square wave. Since the square wave satis-
£ -- fies the DirichJtJt conditions, the iimit as A^ * of x>^{t) at the discontinuities should be

We the averuge value of the discontinuity.

see from the figure that this is in fact the case,

since lot any N^ x^lji) has exactly that value at the discontinuities. Funhermote, for any
other value of/, say, r - /] , we are guaranteed tliat

hm xnU^) ^ jt(/iX

Therefore, the squared error in the Foiirier series representation of the square wave has

zero area, as in cqs. O.Sy} and {3.54).

For this example, the interesting effect that Michelson observed is that the bohavior

of the partial sum in the vicinity of the discontinuity exhibits rippks ai^d diat the peii>c am-

plitude of these ripples does not seem to decrease with increasing N. Gibbs showed that

these are in fact the case. Specifically, for a discontinuity of unity height, the partial sum

9% exhibits a maximum value of 1.09 (i.e., an overshoot of

of the height of the discon-

N tinuity), no matter how large becomes. One must be careful to ;nterpret this correctly,

however As stated before, for m\y fixed value off, say, t = ^i , the partial sums will con-

verge to the correct value, and at the discontinuity they will converge to one-half the sum

of the values of the signal on either side of the discontinuity. However, the closer t\ is cho-
N sen to the point of disconnnuity, the larger must be in order to reduce die error below a

specified amount. Thus, asA^^increases, the ripples in the partial sums become compressed

toward the discontinuity, but for any finite value of A^, the peak amplitude of the ripples

remains constant. This behavior has cume to be known as the Gibbs phenomenon. The im-

plication is that the truncated Fourier series approximation JtA'fO of a discontinuous signal

x(t] will in general exhibit high-frequency npples and overshoot x{t) near the disconti-
N nuities, ff ijuch an approximation is used in practice, a large enough value of should

be chosen so as to g.uarantee that the total energy in these ripples is insignificant. In the
limit, of course, we know that the energy in the approximation error vanishes and that the

Fourier scries representation of a discontinuous signal such as the square wave converges.

"^The hibroTical inform^ttOTi used in this e naitiplc i^ taken from thei>wfc by L^tccZ^i^ rcfcrenceJ in foot-
ncili; 1 ot lhi>> chapter.

Sec. 3.4

Convergence of tfie Fourier Series

^*jW

201

>Nft>

¨r(l)

N = 19

X^{t)

N=79

h*jMihWhMW>

Figure 3,9 Convergence of tfte Fourier series representation of a square

wave: an [lIustratiQn of the Giti^is phenonnenon. Here, vve have depicted the

^f- finite series approximation XM{t) =^

-jv ^n^'*^' for several values of yv

1

202

Fourier Series Representation of Periodic Sjgn^ls

Cnap 3

3.5 PROPERTfES OF CONTINUOUS-TIME FOURTER SERIES
As mentioned earlier, Fourier series representations possess a number of important prop-
enies that are useful for developing conceptual insights into such representations, and they
can also help to recluce the cotnplcJtity of the evaHuation of the Fourier serie^^ of many signals. In Table 3,1 we have summansed these properties, several of ^hich are considered in the problems at the end of this chapter. In Chapter 4, in which we develop the Fourier transform, we will see that most of these properties can he deduced from corresponding
properties of the condnuous-time Fourier transform. Consequendy we limit ourselves here to the discussion of several of Uiese properties to illustrate how they may be derived, in-
terpreted, and used.
Throughout the foKowing discussion of selected properties from Table 3,1, we will
find it convenient to vi^ a shorthand ttotation ttj indicate the relationship between a periodic signal and its Fourier series coefficients. Specifically, jiuppose that jr(r) is a periodic
signal with period T atid fundatnental frequency w^ = IttIT. Then if the Fourier seiies coefficients of x(t) are denoted by a^^ we will use the notation

to Siignify thepaiiing of a periodic sigr^al with its Fourier series coefficients.
3.5.1 Linearity
Let xii) and y{t) denote two periodic signals with period T and which have Fourier series coefftcienU denoted by ajt and ^t- respectively. That is,

yir) ^-^ b,.

Since xii) and y{i) have the same period 7", it easily foliov^ that any linear combination

of the two signals will also be periodic with period T. Furthermore, the Fourier series

= coefficients t^ of the litiear combination of j;(/) and >^/), ^(0

Axii) + By{t), are given

by the sanw linear combination of the Fourier series coefficients for x{t) and yit). Thai i;^,

-- + z(t) = Ax{t) + By(t} * ^ ft = Auft Bb^.

(3,58

We The proof of this follows direcdy from the application of eq, (3,39),

also note that

the linearity property is easily extended to a linear combination of an arbitrary number of

signals with period 7\

3.5.2 Time Shifting
Whenatime shi^ft is applied to aperiodic signal x{t), the perisd Tof the signal is preserved The Fourier series coefficients bi^ of the resulting signal y(0 -- x{t -- ^o) may b^ expressed
as

...i xit - roW ^^^'"di.
7"

(3.59)

Sec. 3.5

Properties of ContiniJc>uS'~nnr>e Fourier Series

203

= - Letting t ; fo in the Integra], and noting that the new variable t will^so range over an interval of duration T^ we obtain

where a^ is the Jtth Fourier series coefficient of j(;). That is, if

(3.60]

then

One consequence of this property is that, when a periodic signal is shifted in time, the
= magnitudes of iLs Fourier series coefficients remain unaltered. That is, \bt\ iatl

3.5.3 Time Reversal
The period T of a periotHc signal x(T) also remains unchanged when the signal undergoes
time reversal. To determine the Fourier series coefficients of y(f) = ^(-/), let us consider the effect of time reversa' on the synthesis equation (3.3S):

X x{-r) =

ate-^^^'"^.

jt=-¨

Making the substitution k = -- m, we obtain

^ y{t) = jc(-t) =

a-^e^'^^'^"'^,

(3.61) (3.62)

We observe that the right-hand side of this equation has the form of a Fourier series syn-
thesis equation for x(-t)^ where the Fourier scries coefficients ht are

bf, = a_i,

(3.63)

That is, if

then

-- x(^t) ^ * a-i,.

In odier words tin^ reversal applied lo a condnuous-time signal results in a time reversal

An of the corresponding sequence of Fourier series coefficients.

interesting consequence

-- of the time-reversal property is that if x(t} is even that is, if xi-t) = x(r)-- then its

-- = Foiirieir series coefficients are also even i.e., a-k

cJ*^ Similarly, if x(t) is odd, so that

= -- xi~f)

^ = J^(0> then so are its Fourier series coefficients i.e., fl_i

-ij^.

>

204

Fourier Series Representation of PBiiodicSignals

Dhap. 3

3-5.4 Time Scaling
Time seeing is an operation that in general changes the pencKJ of the underlying .^i^al.
Speciftcally, if xU) is periodic with period T and fundamental frequency ujo -- Ztt/T,
th^fi j((.<iO* where or is a positive, reai number, is pe:riodit with period T/a and fundamental frequency aw,> Since the time-staling operation applies directly to each of the har-
rtwinic components of v{t\ we may ea?.ily conclude that the Fourier coefftcieiit& tor each
ofthoie ^ortiponenli remain the .same. That is, if x(t) has the Fourier series represenLation
m eq. <3 38Kthen

k = -^

We is ihe Courier series representation ot x(an.

emphasize that, while [he Fourier ctief-

licients have ni>t changed, ihe Fourier series representation has changed because of the

change in the fundamental frequency

3.5.5 MuJtJplJcation
Supposii that aU) and y(0 are both periodic with period T and that
;f(0^~- fli.
^^
Since the product x\f)yit) is also peritidic with period 7", we can expand ]t iri a Founer
M scries wilh Fourier series coefficients hi. expressed in terms of those for r) and y{t). The
result is

X^ x(iyy{7) t^^ ^i ^

^i^k I-

/--OS

(3-64)

One way to derive this relationship (see FroMem 3.46) is to multiply the Fourier series
representations of j:(i) and y(r) and to note that the Alb harmoTiic component in tiie product
will have a coefficient which is the sum of terms of the form a^bf^-i Observe that the sum on the right hand side of eq. (3.64> may he interpretod as the discrete-time convolution of
the sequence representing the Foiu-ier coefficientK of x{i) and the sequence representing the Fourier coefficients of y(r).

3.5-6 Conjugation &f\d Conjugate Symmetry
Taking the complex conjugate of a periodic signal x{t) has the effect of compIOL tonjugatioti and lime reversal on the corresponding Fourier series coefficients. That is, if
--
-i(r) *.

then

ÈT5

x*in <

> '-k'

t?,65)

Sec. 3,5

Properties of Corrtinuous-Time Fourier Series

205

This property is easily proved by applying complex conjugation to both sides of eq. (3.38)

aivd replacing the suitimation variable Jfc by its negative.
-- Some interesting consequences of this property may be derived for x(t) real that

we = iSj when j(r)

x*{i)' Ir^ particular, in this case,

see from eq. (3.65) that the Fourier

series coefficients will be conjugate symmaric, i.e,,

fl-A = a\,

G.66)

as we previously saw in eq. (3.29). This in turn implies various symmetry properties (listed in Table 3J) for the magnitudes^ phases, real pans, and imaginary parts of the Fourier series coefficients of real signals. For example, from eq. (3.66), we see that if JÈ:(f) is real,
then niy is real and

w\- -3-,

= Also, if j:(f) is real and even, then, from Section 3.5.3, ^t iJ-t However, from eq. (3 66)
we see that a\ = a-fc, so that a^ = a\. That is, if xit) is r&al and even, then so are its
Fourier series coefficients. Similarly, it can i?e shown that if jr(r) is real and odd, then its
Fourier series coefficients are purely imaginary and odd . Thus, for example, oo = if x{t)
is real and odd. This and the other symmetry properties of the Founer series are examined further in Problem 3.42,

3.5.7 Parseval's Relation For ContinLJouf-Tlme Periodic Signals

As sh^>wn in Problem 3.46, Parseval's relation for continuous- time periodic signals is

f Wfdr =
\[

|¨,p,

(3.67)

T where the a^ are the Fourier series coefficients of x{t) and is the period of the signal.

Note that the left-hand side of eq. (3.67) is the average power (i.e., energy per unit lime) in one period of the periodic signal x{t). Also,

W i j¨,f ^
1^

T M^dr = M^

(3.68)

so that la^p is the average power in the jtth harmonic component of x[0, Thus^ what ParsevaTs relation-states is that the total average power in aperiodic signal equals the sum of the average powers in all of its harmonjc componenLs,

3.5.8 Summary of Propenies of the Continuous-Time
Fourier Series
In Table 3.1, we suntmarize these and other important properties of contifiuous-time
Fourier series.

3.5.9 ExampJes
Fourier series prijperties, avich as those iisted in Table 3.1, maybe used to circumvent some
of the algebra involved in determining the Fourier coefficients vjf a given signal. In the next

206

Foufier Series Representation of Periodic Signals

Chap, 3

TABLE 3.1 PROPERTIES OF CONTINUOUS-TIME FOURIER SERIES

Pruperty

SCCtlOA

Perkidic Signal

i(f) Periodic with period T and
y{t] j fiLiidainetit^ frcqueocy <ito = liriT

Uneanty Time Shiftiag
FwifiitaCy ShLftmg Conjujation Time RcverBal Time 8calinÈ
Periodic Convolution
MulliplicatKiTi

3.5.1 3.5.2
3.5 6
3.5.3
3.5 4
3.5,5

Ax(t} + By(t)
> a Mfftjij (periodic with period Tfa)
r
xinytn

Foarler S¨ri¨ Cocfikdcnts
tit,
bt
Aak + Bb;
a^
^
1

Differentiation Integratinn

(fJniLt: vulucdand
,
penodic onljf if flii = 0)

CuAju^tc Symmetry for Real SigaaU

3i5.6

i(r> real

\\

(

^

V

'

at - a i

^

Red ^nd Even Signat^

md Real

Odd SLgraJ.'^

Even -Odd Decomposidon

of Real SLigiiAIji

3.5 6
3.5.6

^j) real and even Jit) real and odd

xAt) = eW{jf{/>} [xin real]

Parse var$ ReLatifia for Periodic Signals

a^ leal and even d^ pUKly imagiiiaiy and odd
j^M{fli}

three examples, we illustrale this. The last example in this section then demonsti^es how
properties of a signal can be used to characteiize the signal in great detail.

Example 3.6

We Consider the signal g(t) with a. fundameata] pehod of 4, shown in Figure 3.10.
could iktcnniDe the Fourier series represeotation ofgO) directly from the analysis equa-
tion (3,39), Instead, we will use the relatioiiship of git) to the symmetnc penodic square wave xiO in Example 3.5. Referring to that example* we see that, with 7 = 4 and Ti = 1.

- git) = x{t - 1) 1/2.

(3.69)

S¨ 3.5

Propflrtifls of ContinLCJUS'Timfl FourierSeries

gffi

1
2

-2

-1

-\

207

Figufc 3.1

Periodic sign^il for Example 3.6.

The time-shift pioperty in Tabic 3.1 indicates that, if the Fourier Senes cMfficieDts of x{iy are denoted by a^, the Fourier cuefhcieat^ of ^tr -- 1) may t>e eipressed as

t?k = ^tP

(3,70)

-- The Fourier coefficients of the dc offset in g(t} i.e., the term -1/2 on the right-hand
-- side of eq. (3.69) at^ givea by

Ck =

0.
-{.

for t ?t
forit=0'

(3.71)

Applying the linearity pn>per^ in Table 3.K wc conclude that the coefficients for ^</) may be expressed aÈ

dk^

aj^^-;*irra
^ 2'

for t^O
for t -

whtre each a* may now be replaced by tht corrtspondtng express-ion from eqSr (3,45) and (3,46)^ yielding

isii
fOTjt=

0-72)

ExampJe 3.7
Consider the triangular wave signal ;c(r) with period T = A and fundamental /requcncy
Q^D = ^/2 showninRguTe3Jlr The derivative of this signal is the signal g(r) in Eiara-

-2

2

t

Figure 3.1 1 Triar^jular wave signal in Exa^npFe 3.7.

zoa

Fourier Series Repnesentation of Periodic Signals

Chap. 3

pie 3.6. Dtnyting the FtujiSer ctieflicients of ^(i) by di, and those af x{i) by et^^ we sec
lh;it the dillerentiaticrt pmfM^rt) in Table 3. J indicates that

-- Thi^ ei^uation ctin be used loeaipress ^t in t^mns ^>(i/,^, exc-cpl^shen fc 0. SpcLit]i;ally.
fromeq. (3.72),

For ^ ^ 0, fo cao be determined by tindiog the area under one penod of jr(l) and dividing
by the Length of the pcriijd:
1

Exampre 3.8
m \j^i examine some prcrperties of the Fourier series [epr^sentatioa of a periodic train of
iitlpulseti, or impuise tram. This iiignEd and its repdesentation in terms of complex exponentials wil! play an impoitant role when we discuss the topic of sampling in Chapter 7.
The Lcnpuise trsin with period T may be expressed as

^ x{t) =

60 ^ kT)',

(3.75)

Lt in iJLustrated in Figure 3. i2fa). To deteimme the Fourier seriej; coefjicientj a^, wc ut^e

^ ^ eq. (3.39) and select the interval of integration to be --T/2

t

r/2, avoiding the

placement of impulses ac the integration limits. Within this interval. x(_T) h the same as

Sit), and it follows that

¨* = ^J ^Jit)e-^'^^'^ds = i

0J6)

Tn other wutds, all the Fourier series coeflicieots of the impulse train are LdentLcal. These

coefftctents aie also real valued and even ^'with respect to the index k). This if to be
expected^ since, accorduig to T^le 3.1, any real and even signal (such as our impulse

tiaiu) should have real and even Fourier coefficients.

The impulse train also has a straightforward relationship to yqutire-wave signals

such is git) in Figure 3.6, which we tepeat in Figure 3--l^(b) The derivative of g(t) is

We the sigtial ^r) illustnited in Figure 3.12(c).

may interpret q{t) as the difference ol

two shifted versions of the impulse train x(t). That is,

q{!) = j^r+Ti)-x(t-Til

(3.77)

Using the properties of Fourier series, we can now compute the Fourier Hcriei coeffi-

cients of q{t} and ^J) without any further direct evaluation of the Fomier senes analysis

we equation. Firsts from the tirae-shifting and linearity properties,

see fruiti eq. (3.77)

that the Founcr series coefficienLs hi; of q(t) may be expressed in temis of Uic Founer

sehes coefficients djt of xit); that is.

bk = È^^o'"idA- tf-'"*^"^i w*.

Sftc. 3.S

Pi^operties of Continuous -Time Fourier Series

ytn

,1
,
w
gCi)

209

ñJ -T

- T/E

-Ti
(t.)

i*t]

T/È

1

-T/È

T-

T/È
T1

1C£
F^Lrre 3.TZ (a) Periodic train of impuJsas, (b) periodic square wave:
m (c) detivatlve of the penodic square wave (b).
where 4>o = liriT. Using eq. (3.76), we then have

Finally^ mice q{i) is ihe denvilive of ^(r)^ we can use the dJfTer^nU-ation property in
Table 3.1 to write

where tht Cf arc the Fourier series coefficients of git}- Thus,

(3.78)

^ i-ir

--r

^

=
-J

-- =

-jT

t ?^ 0.

(3.79)

.

210

Fourier Seres Reprasentation of Periodic StgnaJs

Chap 3

^, where we have used the fact that oi^yT = lir. Nfiti: lha[

(3,7^) it vatic for A ?*= 0,

since we cannot solve far td from cq (378) with k - 0. Hov^ver. tince ci) i& jusr the

average value of g{t) over one period, wc can determine it by inspection from Figure

3J2(b>'

cn = ^.

(3.80)

Bqt>. (3.80) ind (3.79) are idcntiCiil to eqs- (3.42) and (3.44). respectively, for the Fourier series coeflicietits of the square \tave derived in Example 3.5.
The next txainple is chosen to illustrate the use of Tnan> of the properties in
Table 3 J.

Example 3.9
Suppose wc are given the following facl:^ alXMit a signal xij):

I* x(!) IS a real signal;

- 2, x{() is periodic with period f 4, and it has Founer series coefficients a^

> 3. tii = Ofor|jt|

I.

4* The signal with Founer coefficienisi'fc = e'^^^^a ^ is odd.

Let us show that ttiis information is sufficient to Jetemiine the signil x{t} to within a sign factor Accoirding to Fact 3. j(r) has at nh)Èt three nonzero tiourier series coefficients
at: Of, au and tii-i. Then, since x(i) has fundamentat frequency a>a = 2ir/4 ^ 71^/2, il
follows that

Since i.it) is real (Fact 1), we can use the synunetry properties in TatJe 3 1 to conclude

= that j2) is real and at

d*_ , . Consequently,

s{t) = C] + aie^"''^ -H (ai^^^^'^)- = oy + Tm^aie^""'-}.

(3.81)

Let us now detemune the signal corresponding to the Fourier coefficients bt given

in Fact 4, Using the time-reversal propeity ftr^m Tahle 3 J , we note that a- ^ corresponds

to the sigtial Ji{ -t) Also, the lime-shift property in the table indicates that multiplication

of the *th Fourier coefficLenr by e ^'"^ -= ^-^**ii corresponds to the underlying signal

-- We being sJiif^d by 1 to the right {i.e., having r replaced by r I ).

conclude that the

= coefficLenLs h,, conespond to the signal Jf('-(r - I))

jr(-/ + l>, which, accordiDg to

+ Fact 4, must be odd. Since j:(^) is teal, x{-T \\ must also be real. Frum Table 3. 1,

it then follows that the Fourier coefficients of j(-f + 1} must be purely imaginary and

odd. Thus, i£[) =Oandfr-i = -i"]. Since time-revet^al and time-shift operations cannot

change the average power per penod. Fact 5 holds even if j;(f) is replaced by ;r( - f + 1 ).

That is,

= \x(-t -h \}\^dt

1/2,

-J

(3.8Z>

Sec. 3.6

FojnerSenes Representation of Discrete-Time Penodic Signals

We tran now use Parse val's rclasion to conclude that

2T i

Subslirudng ^i

-- -

--b.^

in

we this i;gu<ilJori>

obtain |6| |

]/2. Since Èjj li also known

tt) be purely imaginiiry, it must be either Jf2 or -j/2

Now we tan translate (hese conditions on ht iind i)| into equivalent Ktatemc^hts on

^ = = f7o sind i^t' First, sinci:

0. Fact 4 implies that rtn

U. With Jt - I, this t:tjntlition

m implieb that

= e ""'b i - -j^ i ^ /A*,, Tlius if wc take È£, = j/2 then cTi =

= l/2.andtherefott,fr(jmeq. <3.¨l^^(0

= - wt,['Trf/2) Alternatively, if we take fr|

^ -j/2. then w I

=

1/2. and rhereforeH j(/)

cos(irr/2).

3.6 FOURIEIT SERfES REPRESErvHATION OF DISCRETE-TIME
PERIODIC SfGNALS
Itithis section, we consider ihe Fourier scries reprcsetitatlon of distrete-time periodic signak. While the discussion closely par^dlels that of Section 3,3, there are some important
differences. In particular, the Fourier series representation of a discrete- time periodic signal is sijinite series, as opposed to the infinite series representation required for continuous-
time periodic sigtials. As aconse<iuetice, there are no mathematical issues of conveyance
such as those discussed iti SectitJn 3,4.

3.6. 1 Linear Combinations of HarmonicaJfy Related Complex
Exponentiafs

N As defined in Chapter 1, a discrete -time, signal jtfjr] is periodic with perioJ if

x[n] = x[n ^Nl

(3.84)

N O The fundametital period \s the smallest p^tsitive integer for which eq. 84) holds, and
fo^y ^ 2WA^ is the fundamental frequency. For example, die complex exponential ^^f-'^'"^*"
is periodic with period N. Furthermore, the set ijf all discrete-time complex exponential signals that are periodic with period A^ is given by

Mn] aÝLÝ2 = = = f-'"^*'"''

e-'^'-'''-'^^'\ k

OM)

All of these signals have fundamenul frequencies that are multiple> of 2tt/N and dius are
harmonically related.
As mentioned in Section 1.3 J, there are only A^ distinct signals in the set given by eq. (3.85), This is a consequence of the fact that discrete-time ctimplex exponen tials which differ in frequency by a multiple of 27t are identical Specifically, (f\f[n} =
= ^ñiM rf>f<f[nl ^/^^\[n], and, in general,

(pAnl = 0t-Hr\fiJ.

(3.86)

That is, when ^is changed by any integer multiple of A^, the identical sequence is gener
ated. This differs frtnn the situation in continuous time in which the signals ^f,u) defined in eq. (3.24) are all different from one another.

212

pQurier Series Representation cf Periodic Signal

thap 3

We nt>w wish to consider the representation of more general periodic se^quences in
terms of linear combinations of the sequences 4'*[''J Jneq. (3,S5). Such a linear combination has the form

N Since the seguenceis (^j^[n] are distintjt onl> over a range of successive values of k, the
summation in eq, (3,87) need oiiJy include terms over this range. Thus, the suiriTnaiion is
We on A, as fr vanes over a range of !^ successive integers, beginning with any value oft. -- indicate this by expressing the limits of the summation as Jt (N). That is,

k=i.!n

k=iU'i

k {\t

For exampJe, k could take on the values = jt 0, 1,

N = - I. or ft

3, 4,

N + 2 In

either case, by virtue of eq. (3.86), exactly the same set of complex exponential sequences

appears in the summation on the right-hand side of eq, (3.88). Equation (3. 88) is referred

to as the discrete-time Fourier series and the coefficients a^ as the Fourier series (oeffi-

tienrs.

3.6.2 Determination of the Fourier Series Representation of a Periodic SignaJ

Suppose now that wc are given a sequence x\n] that is periodic with fundamental period

We N.

would like todeteimiue whether a representation of j[n] in the form of eq. (3.88)

ej^ists and, if so^ what the values of the coefficients Uk are. This question can be phrased in

terms of finding a soJution to a set of Hnear equations. Specifically^ if we evaluate cq. (3.88)
N for successive values oi n cviresponding to one pexiod of ^[n], we obtain

X = r[l]

^^'^

'

k~\->

(3.8^)

X :[N-l]-

¨^^

= k <}>/}

N TTius, eq. (3.89) represents a set of A^ linear equations for the unknown coefficients tJ;
N as k ranges over a set of successive integers. It can be shown that this set of equations
is linearly independMl ^nd covKsequentl^ can be solved to obtain the coefftcients it^ J"
terms of the given values of x[n]. In Problem 3.32£ we consider an example in which the
Fourier series coefficients are obtained by explicitly solving the set of A^ equations given in eq. <3.B9). However, by following steps parallel to those used in continuous time, it is
possible to obtain a closed-form expression for the coeffici^etLts Hi, in terms of the values of the sequence jc[n]

Sec, 3 6

Fourier Serhas Representathor of Discrete-1fme Periodic Sjgnals

2\3

Ttie basis for this result h the facu .shown in Problem 3.54, ihai

^.,

] 0, ollienvise

(3.90)

Equation (3.90) states that the sum over one period of the values of a periodic complex
exponential is ^enj. unJess that complex exponential is a constant.
Now consider ttie Fourier series repre^entatfon of eq. (3.88) Multiplying both side^ N by e~ J'''^^^^)'^ and summing over terms, we obtain

(3.9U

Interchaitging the order of summation on the rigtit-hand side, we have

(3.92)

Fmm m tha identity eq. (3.9Q>, the innermost sum on n on the right-hand side of eq. (3 92^
-- is zero> unless fr r is zero or an integer multiple of N. Therefore, if we choose values for
r over the sanw range as tJial over which k varies in the oQier summatioTi, the innermost
N sum on the right-hand .side of eq, (3,92) equals If k = r and if jt ?^ r. The right-hand
side of eq, (332) then reduces to Nary and we have

^ 2! a, =

-jfiljrfN)n
^^")^

K={S)

(393)

This provides a closed-form expression for obtaining the Fourier senes coefficients,
and we have the discrete-time Fourier series pair.

x[n\ =

X X .?t^^*^*" =

^^^^

(3.94)

IjX N Ok =

^[n]e-^'^^ =

ri-^^'j

j^ n = iN)

f3.95)

These equations play the same role for thscrete-time periodic signals that eqs. (3.38) and

(3.39) play forcoiitinuous-tmie periodic signals, with eq. <3.94) the yvnfA^TJjr equation and eq (3.95) the analysis equation. As in continuous time, ih^ disciete-time Fourier series

coef^cients a^ are often referred to as the spectrai coejficient-f of x{n]. These coefficienLs
N specify a decomposition of j:[n] into a sum of harmonically related comple;^ exponen-

tials.
Referring to eq. (3.8S). we see that if we take Jt in the range from
have

N - to

1, ^^^e

+ + = x[n]

actf>ii[n] -H ai<^i[n]

. . . a^-\(pN-i[nl

(3.%>

214

Fourjer Series Representation of Perk}ciic Signals

Chap. 3

we Similarly, if k ranges from 1 to A^,

obtain

= xln]

a\i>i[n] i- uithln] -h . . . + a^(^w[n].

(3.97)

From eq. (3.86). <^["1 "^ '^/^["J^ ^^^ therefore, upon comparing eqs. (3 96) and (3.97),
N we conclude that tta = aa'. Similarly, by letting jt range over any set of consecutive
integers and using eq. (3.86), we can conclude that

Hk = a*,^.

(3.98)

N That is* if we consider mort than sequential values of k. the values a,^ repeat periodically

with period N. Il in important thai this fact be interpreted carefully, Ir particular, since there

N are only distinct complex exponentials that aie periodic with period iV, the discrete-

N tinii Fourier series representation is a finite series with tenns. Therefore, if we fix "the N consecutive y^ues of k over which we define the Fourier series in eq. (3,94), we 'will

On m obtain A set of exactly A^ Fourier coefficients from eq. (^.95).

the other hand, times

it will be convenient to use different sets ofN values of jt, and consequendy, it is useful

to regard eq. (3.94) a* a sum over any arbitrary set of A^ successive values of k. For

this reascn, it is sometimes convenient to diink oiat^ as a sequence defined for all valu&s

of k^ but where only A^ successive elements in the sequence will be used in the Fourier

series representation. Fuithermore, since the 0jt["] J^peat periodically with period .V as
we vary k leq. (3,86)], so must the a^ [eq, (3.98)1. This viewpoint is illustrated in the next

example.

Exampfe 3. TO
Consider the signal

x[n] = sinwfls,

(3.99)

which is the discrete-time counterpart of the signal x(t) = siiijUf,/ of Example 3,3, xln] js periodic only if 27r/wo is an integer or a ratio of integers. For the case when 2ir/W{) is an integer N, that is, when

x[n] a periodic with fundamental penod N. and we obtain a rej?ult that is exactly analo-
gous 10 the continuous -time ca^e. Expanding the signal as a sum of two complex exponentials £ we get

x[n] = i,cA2^^^)¨ - l-e ji^-f^^^

{3.\m)

Comparing eq. (3.100) with eq. (3.94j, we see by inspection that

Sec. 3.6

Four-er Series Representation of Discrete-Time Periodic Signals

215

and the remaining coefficients over the inierval of summation are zero. As described

prevbusly,

these

cycffiticnts repeat

\vith

pericjd

N,

thus,

¨ ^^

+

a

is also

equal to (1 /2y>

and

3\-i equals -- i \/2j). The Fourier series eoefficicnifi for this example with /V = 5 are

illusuatcd in Figure 3,1?. The fatl that Ihey repeal pcriociicall/ is indictitcd. Ho^vcver,

only one pffriwi is utilized in the synthesis d^uatiun (3.94).

t 2(

-6

-^

-e-7 -S-4-3-a

12 3

567 9

10 11

_1
2j

Figure 3.13

= Fourier coefficients for jir[n]

siii(2Tr/5)/7.

-- Coni^ider now the case when 27r/wn is a ratia of integers that is^ when

Assuming that Af and A^ do not have any common factors. x[n\ has a fundamental period of /V, Again expanding j[nl as a sum of two complex exponentials, we have

V x[n] = ^^jW'i-^^N _ ' 2f

jMilirf^m

from which we can determine by inspection that fl^f = (l/2£, a-m = (- 1/2j), and the
remaining coefficients over one peritHi of length J^ are zero. The Fourier coefficients
M for this example with - 3 and A' = 5 are depicted in Figure 3.14 Agam, we have
N indicated the periodicity wf thecoei^cients. For example^ for = 5^0i = o-n, which
in our example equals (-1/2^). Note^ however, that over any period of length 5 there are
only two nonzero Fauriei coefficients, and therefore there are only two nonzero terms in
the synthesis equation.

V
1
n

ñ¨

-e

1

2

7

12

--~i^-6-5 4 -- 1> -1

1

t
J

4

5

6

a 9 to 11

13

k

2]

3J = Figure

4 Fourier (XiefficiBiTls for x[n\

sln3{2Tr/5)/j,

1

2T6

Fourier S¨rffis ^epresentalion of Periodic Signals

Chap.

ExampJe 3.1
Consider the sijmal
-tfn] = 1 + si[l(^

This signal is penodic with penott N, aad^ as in Example 3.10^ we can expand ^\ti]
directly id terms of complex eKponentJals to obtain

i^/

2

Collecting terms, we find that

Thus the Founer series coefficiems for this example anc

ao ^ 1,

13 ^'

^

3
2

1
^ 27

^

3 2

"

i .
2^'

3

I

,

^"' " 2 ~2/ ~ 3 "*" 2^"

1 .

1
a 2 = -^^
with rt; = for other values of k jn the interval of sumtn^on in the synthesis equation {3.94> AgaiDj the Fmiiicr coePEvcients are periodic with period N, ijo, fw csamplc, flv ^ 1. a^N-i ^ I + |/- 3^^^ ^i-iv = 1^' i" Figure 3,15<3) we have plotted the real and imaginary paTt"; of ihcse coefficitnls- forA^ = 10. while the magnitude and phsise of
the coeRicients are depicted in Figure 3,15(b).
Note that in Example 3.11 , a_f = a\ for ^1 values <>i kr In fact, thvs equalit> holds whenever .\[fi] is real. The property is identical to one that we discussed in Section 3.3 for
continuous-time pericHlic signals, and as in contmuous time, one jmplication is that there are two alternative forms for the discrete-time Fourier series of leal periodic sequences Thesf forms are analogous to the continuous-time Fourier series representations given in eqs, (3.31) and (332) and are examined in Problem 3.52. Pot out purposes, the exponential form of the Fourier scries, as given in eqs. (3.94) and (3.95), is particularly convenient,
and we will use it exclusively.

Sec. 3.e

Fourier Series Representation ot Discrete-Time Periodic Signais

ffl*(a^J

217

-2M

-N

h

2H

k

I..I,
Ë]

RJ.I

3 m (a^}
ll
M,

.1.1
hi

H.LL^

VlO.

J

-2^

-N

2H

-^Sk Tr/2

^ t^r

2N|

-fl^J

Figune 3.15 (a) Real and imaginary parts of the Fourier series coefticjents in Exanr^ple 3.11; (b] magnitude and phase of me same coefficients.

2

21a

Faurier Series Representation of Periodic Sigaals

Cnap. 3

Example 3. 1

In thi:^ example, we consider the djscrete-Time ^teriodjc :£qiJire wave ihown in Fig-

We ure Xi6.

can evaluate the FouHir fierio** for this signal u>£mg &q (3.95) IJecause

^ xln\ ^ 1 for -A'l

it :^ ^i, it i^ purtivularly tonvenicnt tu thwsc the Icngth/V

inteirv;:i] of !iumniatiun ineq. (3.95) su that ii includes rherangf; N\ ^ n ^ ^j. In thi-^

case, wc can express cq, (^-^5) 3ls

=i

a^

1^

"'*

e \r^

'^L-^^'^^'r

(1.102)

mil,,,, mil

-N

-N|

Ni

N

Figure 3.1 6 Discrete-time periodic square wave.

m LetiJDg = n + .V|, we obstive that C4. (3.102) bctomeEi

^'^l1

C^.lOB)

m The summation in eq, (3. 103) c^nsistt, of the sum of the fimi 2Ni + 1 terms a ge<]ineinc
series, which can Ix: evaluated using the result of Problem 1.54. Thji yields;

I
^N

-- /l

^-it^'^-¨i^l^\ + ^VN

- jtaTr"vi

I

1

tf

J ^ /i^2Tr,^.^^|^..^Ir(,V|^ i/2!J,v _ ^-^^:TrH\, + i/:y^j

(3 104)

N

smiTTkl!^}

A ?^0. ÝK-t2K..

artd

= Èfi

"^
'
,
/V

Jt - 0, ^/V, Ý2^

tTl"05>

N The a>eÈhcients d^ for Z^i -t- 1 =^ 5 are sKetchtd for =r 10. 20, and 40 jn Figures
3A7{a), fb), and (c), respectively.

In discussing the convergence of the continuous-time Fourier series in Section 3.4,
we considered the example of a symmetric square wave and observed how the finite sum in eq. (3.52) converged to the ^uare wave as the number of terms approached it^tinity. In par-

Sec. 3 6

Fourier Series Representation of Oiscreie-Tlme Periodic Signals

219

MM m p"^Y f > r 1

ii -£i

¨

i

I

I

\3;

Jl*^ ''Tn*' ^ '*'!!*

.,.,,

j J j H L IlI I

iL.

llil)^., ii.,.,,

4 'B

'^nnA

m Ni i

v'^'j'i!i"j'^-5

-

^"^"""

K)

FJgure 3. 1 7 Fourier sertes coeFficients far the periodic square wave Df Ex-

= ampia 3.12; plots of tot for 2Afi + 1

5 and (a) Af = 10. (b) /V = 20; and

= {) /V

40.

tLcular, we observed the Gibbs phenomenon at the discontinuUyi. whereby, tts the number of terms increased, the ripples in the partial sum (Figure 3.9) became con^ressed toward
the discontinuity, with the peak amplitude of the rippLes Tcmaining constant indepeiniently
of the number of terms in the partial sum. Let us consider the analogous sequence of partial suins for tKe discrete-time square wave, where, for convenience^ we will assunie that the
N period is odd. In Figure .1.18, we have depicted the signals

^M ^f^] =

a^e^^^'-^^'^'f'

-M fi--

<3 106)

1^5. for the example of Figure 3,16 with /V ^ 9, 2N| +

and for several value:^ of A/.

For A/ = 4,thepartial suniexactly eqTial-v Jf[^i]. Wesee inpartioularthat incontrast tothe

continuous -time case, there are no convergence issues and there is no Gibbs phenomenon.

In fact, there ai^ no convergence issues with the discrete-time Fourier series in general.

The reason for this stems from the fact that any discrete -time periodic sequence .t[k1 is.
N completely specified by a jintte number of parameters, namely, the values of the se-

N -- N -- quence over une period. The Faurier series analysis equation (3.95) simply transforms this
set of piirameters into an equivalent set ^the values of the Fourier coefficients and

220
v[nj

Fourier Series Represantation of Periodic Signals

Chap. 3

M=1

lll'lT£llllllT.¨TlllllT..tlllllT,,Tlllll

-ia

-S

9

18 n

fa)

ñ

1

*

f*

I

1

xrn]

fl f

ñ

t

t
t

T*

M-2
U
*T m

T*iT

till.. TmT._ TttI

-18

-Q

ie

rh

x[n]

M=3

¨

ñ

A¨aA

L**U

-ie

-9

A*¨Jl

A¨¨ja
18 n

t**¨
-IS

x[rt]
"9 44**

***t*

M=4

Figure 3.T8 Partial sums of eqs

(3.106) and (3.107) for the periodic

square w^ve of Rewire 3.16 with

=5 W 18 n /y = 9and2/yi +1

(a)

= 1;

W = M = (b)

= 2, (C) Af

3, (d)

A.

the synthesis equation (3.94) tells ufi how to recover tiie values of the original sequence in

N W terms of definite series. Thus, if is odd and we take

- (A^ - iy2 in eq. (3.106), the

N sum includes exactly tenns, and consequentlj, from the synthesis equations, we have

N ^d = x{k\ x\n\. Similarly, if is tven

wt lei

iln] =

^w ^^^jt^^^^W}.

i = -jif+i

<-^-3f>7)

M then wi^

= N/1^ this sum consists (rf yv terms, and again, we can conclude from

= eq. (3.94) that i[/i| x[n\.

In contra^^t, a continuous-time periodic signal lakes on a cantinuum of values over

a single period, and an infinite number of Fourier coefficients are required to represent it.

Sec. 3.7

Properties of Discrete -Time Fourier Series

221

^ Thus, ]n *:eneral, none of the firiite piUtUi sums in

(3.52) yield the exact values ot x{tX

and tonvtirgence issues, such as those c^nsicicred in Section 3.4^ arise as w<i consider the

problem of evaluating the limit as the ntimbej of terms approaches intiiiity.

3.7 PROPEffTTES OF DISCRETE TIME FOURIER SERIES
There are strong similaiities between the properties of discrete- time and continuous-time Founer series. This can be readily seen by comparing the discrete-tittie Fourier jicries properties sumrnarized in Table 3.2 witti their continuous- time counterparts in Table ,V1 _

TABLE 3.2 PROPERTIES OF DISCRETE-TIME FOURIER SERIES

Property

l>trioftfcÈtgnaJ

if n] ] PcTWiiiic wuh period A' and Mnl j fucKJamcntal trequency fjih = l-irtN

Linearity
Time Shifting Frequency Shifting
Cunjugation
Time Reversil
Time ScalbQg
Penocic Convolution
Muttiplicanon

Ax[n] +B.v[ft]

- X[n

rt^t]

.Wi2tViVm^ 1

X[-n]

m [ jr[n/mj, if ¨ is a multiple of

Ok

m \r n is not i muluplc oT

(periodic with period mW}

Y^ Jc[r]y[n - r]

FiriiL DifTerence
Rimning Sum

}\n] - x{n - I]

-."-

/Haitc vaaillued and pcnudjc nnly

)

Fourier ^rfcs Coefflcieots ifi, E^cnodx with
period Ai^ AHi, ^ Bbi
at- n

--1 /viewed as period tc Oa

[

nod "* \^with. pe

fli/v'

l-f.N<

^>* /V.<2-n;\

O -e '^^'
(

CtTJugaLc Synnmetty tor Real SigQuLi

x\t\] rc;i]

Real and Kven Signals Real and Odd Signals
Even -Odd Decompi>!£ition
nf Rea.] Signals

x\n\ real and even >\n] re-al and udd
-*-.["] = Sv-^^n]} A^r¨l = Od{f[flU

[T[n]real] rsLnJr^jal]

Paiseval^RcIatiyn for Periodic Signiifs
V. UE.l!^ = y. |¨.H
H-t/V)

= |¨v|

A 'tJ

aj. rea] and even lii. purely JzDliigLnary and ddd

222

Rjiirier Series flepresontatJon of Periodic Signals

Cliap. 3

The dedvaticns of many of these properties are very stmUar to those of the coiresponding propejiie$ for continuous-time Fauder series, and severaJ such derivauons ^e considered iache problems at the end of the chapter. In addition, in Chapter 5 we will set that most of
the properties t;un be inferred from corresponding properties of frie discrete-time pourier
tiansfonn. Consequently, we limit die dtscussioti in the following subsections to only a few
of these properties, including ^Averai that have impoitant difEereihces relative to those for
continuous time. We also provide examples illustrating the usefulness of various dascretebme Fourier series properties for developing conceptual insights and helping to reduce the complexity of the evaluation of the Fourier series of many periodic sequences.
As with continuous time, it is often convenient to use a shorthand notation to indicate the relationship between a periodic signal and iis Fourier series coefficients. Specifically,
N if x[n] is a periodic signal witb period and with Fourier series coefficients denoted by
Qf, then we v^iH write
--
A[n] * * at-

3,7.1 hfultipJtcatJon
The multiplicadon property of the Fgurier series representation is one example of a property that reflects the difference between continuous time and discrete time, Vrom Table 3.1, the product of two condnuous-iime signals of poriod T results in a periodic signal with pe-
riod T who.ie sequence of Fourier series coefficients is the convolutuyn of the Ë;equences
tsf Fourier series coefficients of the two signals being multiplied. In discrete time, suppose
that
IS

and
-- y[n] * > bi,

are both periodic widi period N. Then the product .t[fljy[nl is also periodic with period Af, and, as shown in Problem 3,57^ its Fourier coefficients, dj^, are given by

^ = x[n]y[n] ^-~>- dt

a,hi,-,.

(3.10S)

Equation (3.108) is analogous to the definition of convolution, except that the summation
variable is now restricted to an inter\'a] of A' consecutive samples. As shown in Problem
^ We 3*57, the summauon can be taken over any set of consecudve values of ^ refer to this
type of operation as a periodic convolutujn between the two periodic sequences of Fourier
co&fficients. The usual form of the cotvvolution $unv (where the summauon variable ranges from -- 1=¯ to *) is sometimes referred to as aperiodic convolutiori, to distingaish it from
periodic convolution,

3.7.2 First Difference
The discrete-nme parailel to die differentiation property of die continuous- time Fourier
series i^nvolves the use of the first-difference operation, which is defined as x[n] - :K\n - 11.

Sec. 3.7

Properties of Discret^-Tims Four&r Series

223

If x[a] is p&riodic with period A/, then so is y[ti]^ since shifting x[n] or linearly combining x[n] with another periodic signal whose period is /V always resuhs in a periodic signal with period N. Also, if
-- x[n] < > fli,

then the Fourier coefficients corresponding to the fintt difference^ of x[n] m<ty be expressed

HS

^ x[n] " xln - 1]

(1 -'f-^*f^^^'^')aA,

(3.1[>9>

which is easily obtained by applying the tinrte-shifting and liiiearity properties in Table 3.2.
A oonunon use of this property is in situations wh^re evaluation of ihe Fourier series co
efficients is easier for the first difference than for the original sequence. (See Problem
3.31.)

3,7.3 Parseva Is Relation for DJscrete-TTme Periodic Signals
As shown in Problem 3.57, ParsevnJ^s relation for discrete-time periodic Gig^a]^ iK given
by

where the a^ are the Fouri&r series coefficients of x[n] and iV is the period. As in the continuous-time case, the left-hand side of Parseval's relation is the average power in one period for ihe periodic MgrtaJ^fnl. Slimlady, \at\^ /s the average power in the ^th harmonic component of x[n], TTius, otice again, Parseval's relation states that the average pewer in
a periodic signal equals the sum of the average powers in atl of its harmonic components.
N In discrete dme. of course^ there are only distinct harmoTiic components, and since the
i aie poriodic with period A^, the sum on the right-hand side of eq. (3.U0J can be tak¨n
N over any consecutive values of k.
3.7.4 Examples
In this subsection, we present several e^tamples illustrating how properties of the discrete-
time Fourier scries can be nsod to characterize discrete-time periodic signiiis and to com-
pute their Fourier series representations. Specifically, Fourier series properties, such as
those listed in Table ^2, may be used to simplify the process of detertnining the Foiirier
series coefficients of a given signal. This involves fij^t expressing the given f^ignal in terms
of other signals whose Fourier series coefficients are already known or are simpler to com pute. Then, using Table 3.2, we can express the Fourier series coefficients wf the given
signal in terms of the Fourier series coefficients of the other signals. This is illustrated in
Example 3 J 3. Example 3.14 then illustrates the determination of a sequence ftx)m some pzjiia) information. In Example 3. 15 wciJlusirate the use of the periodic convolution prop-
erty in Table 3,2,

'

ZZ4

FOLrJer Series Representation of Periodic Signals

Chap. 3

Example 3.t3

Let us consider ;he ptoWem &f finding tht Fourier sert¨!^ coefficients cif^ of the sequence
jf[n] showninFigure J. 19(a), This sequence has a fundamental periodof 5. We observe
that x[ri] may be viewed as the sumof th* square wave jci[nl ia Figure 3.l9Cb)aud the

dc tequ^nce jf ; [n] n\ Rgure 3. 1 9(c). Denoting the Fourier series coefficients of n ;( p [ j by hi and those of ji [n] by c^, ive use the hnearily property of Table 3.2 to conclude that

fl* =i?t + a.

t3.nj)

*¨

Tt

^tM

M LLilLU -5

(a)

in ,

111 ,

'ifi ,,

r-
,

MMTiTnit in If

)l3[n]

fc}

Figure J. 19 (a) PefJOdiC Sequence x\n\ for ExampJe 3^.13 and its representation as a $Liin of (b) ttie square wave xij/i] and fc) lt}¨ t^ sequence ;f2l/T].

From Example 3 12 <w]th A^i = I aj>d A^ = 5). the Founer senes coefficients b), corre-
Svpondm^ \vf x\{ti\ can be expressed jiÈ

1 Eiii(37ri/5)
' fort ?t 0, Ý5, +10,... J _ J 5 sin(irjy5)

3

5'

f^irfr = 0, +5, Ý10, ...

(3.112)

The iequetice X2 [n\ has only a dc value, which is captured by jls zeroth Fourier
series coefficient:

(3T13)

n^ti

Since the discrete-time Fourier series coefficients are periodic, it follows that t, ^ 1

whenver A- is an integer multiple of 5. The remainiag cDefficients of x-^\tii\ must be ter^.

We becajse jf2[nj contains (tnly a ic component.

can no* substitute the express^ioDs for

bt, and c> into eq. (3. Ill) to obtain

= flt
5^

1 sin<3irjt/5)
5 sjn(irA/5)

foTjt ?^ 0, Ý5, Ý10, ,..
foujt = a t5, Ý10, ...

<3.n4>

4

Sec. 3.7

Properties Qt Discrate-Time Fourier Series

zzs

Example 3. 1
Suppose wt ire given the following facts about a sequence ^[nj:
^ 1. x[Fi] is periodic with pentxl = 6
2. iL^, irl^j = 2. 3. Xl-^i-n^xin] = 1. 4. f[nj ha& the minimum power per period among ihe set of .signals saiisfying the
preceding three conditions.
Ltl Lii^ determine ihe sequence j[n). We denote theFouner series coefficients of A[nJ by
(3^, From Fact 2, we conclude thai ij(j = 1/:! Noting that (- 1)" - e' >"" - f-^'^ir^J-^^^ wc see from Fact 3 that s^ = 1j'6- From Parsevars relation (see Table 3.2)^ the average power in ;v[nl ii

f-^\^s.\
t-"}

:3.l]5>

Since each nonzero coefftcient contributes a positive amount to P, and iince the vidues

P = [>f Oil and fl^ are prespecified, the value of

is minimized by choosing a = <7: I

=
ÈT4

U - 0^

CI.

thcrt foMowsthai

xln] - + flo fl^e^'" = (1/3) + (l/6)(- IT.
which J,"; sketched in Figure 3.20_

(3.116)

K\n]

1

1

i1

1

1

6

ññ*
T t _LJ" ,,

-2 1

Fpgure 3.20 Sequence x[rt\ that is consistent with the properties specified
in Example 3.14.

Example 3.15
In this example wedetermine and sketch a periodic sequcince, given an algebraic expres-
sion fftr its Fourier series coeffitienls. In the process, we will also eKploLl the periodic
convolution property f&iee Table 3.21 cf the discrete-time Fourier iKerles. Specifically, as stated in the tsble and as "Shown in Problem 3.58, if ^Inl and ylnl are periodic with period N^ then the signal

N IS also periodic with period Af. Here, the summation may be taken over any set of
consecutive values of r. Furthenrtore, the Ftmrier series ci>efficients cf w[/ij are equal to Natbt, where a^ and bj, are the Fourier coefficients of x[n] and yi_n]^ respectively.

226

Courier Scries Represantcition of PBriodic Signals

Chap. 3

Suppose now that we axe totd thai ^ signa] w[n] is periodic wiUi a fuixlanientai penod of JV = 7 and with Fourier series coefficients

= f^ii

--y

'--

(3.117)

We observe that c* = 7rfJ, where d^ denotes the sequence of FonJier series coefficients

-- of a square wave x[n]. as iir Example 3,12, with /^fp

1 aodyv = 7. Using tfie periodic

con vi>]u turn property, we s^t that

2 ^ = H'[nJ

x[r]x[n- ^l -

~ x[r]j([n rj,

(3. MS)

^ ^ wheren in rtie last equiility, we tiavecbosen to sum ovetthe interval - 3

r

3, Except

for the fact that the sum is limited to a finite interval, the pioduct-aod-sum method for

evaluating convolutioa is applicable bcre. In fact, we can coavcrt eq, (3. US) to an ordinary convolution by defining a signal ^[n] that equals v[n\ for --3 ^ n :^ 3 and in z¨o

Otherwise. Then, finsm eq. (3.11StK

^ ^ = w[ti]

x[r]x[n " rj ^

x[r]x[n - r}.

F = -3

That is, ^[n] is the aperiodic convolution of ^le sequences x[n] and jc[tt].
ITie &equence!i x[r], i[rj, and jIh- r] are fetched in Figure 32 1 ta)-(c)r From the figure wt can imtnediately calculate w[n]. In particular we see that >i^lO] = 3:h'H1J =
h^[l] = 3; iv[-2] = w[2] = 1; and wl-3J - w[3] = 0. Since w[rt] is penodic with
period 7, we can ihen sketch w[tt] as shown in Figure 3.21 (d).

3,S FOURIEff SERIES AND LTl SYSTEMS

In th^ preceding few sections, we have seen that the Fourier series representation can

be used to construct any periodic signal in discrete time and essentially all periodic

continuous- time signals Df practical importance. In addition, in Section 3.2 we saw that

the response of an LTI systetn to a linear combination of compiex exponentials taJtes a

= particularly simple form. Specifically, in continuous time, if x(r)

c'' is the input to

acOTidnuous-time LTI systetn, then the output is given by yU) = H(s)e", where, fr^m

eq. (3.6),

i^

= H(.s]

I

h(7)e-"dT,

(3.1X9)

in which hU) is the impulse response of the LTI system. Similarlyn if jrfn] = z" is the itiput to a discrete-dme LTI system, then the output is
given by y[nj = //(;)::", where, from eq. (3.10),
-I- a:

in which h[n\ is the impulse response of the LTI system.

Sec. 3J

Fourier Series ard LTI Systems

Ml

111
3-2 1 D 1 2 3
{a)

111

-1

1

(bl

Z27
x|r]
III
xtr]
x(n rj

III

III'

II

n-T

r-1 n n+l

win]

LJ

-7

-a -2 -1

LJ

Figure 3,21 (a) Hie ^u^rti-wave sequence x{r] in Example 3.15; (b) the sequence x[r] equal to x[r] for -3 i^ r i^ 3 and zero Qtherwrise it) the sequence Jf[/T- r]: (d) the sequence tv|^] equal to the i:>ertodic convoluton of x[n] wrth ttself and k) the aperiodic convolution ot x[n] with x[n\

When s or z are general complex numbers, ^(j) ^^^ f^iz) ^e referred to a^ the
system functions of the corresponding systems. For continuous-time signals and systems
in this and the following ch^ter, we focus on the specific case in which 6{^{s} = 0, so thai i = jai, and consequently, e" h of the fonn e-^'^^ This input is a complex exponential at frequency tu. The system function of the form s = jtij--i.e., H{jtit\ viewed as a function
-- of nj is referred tu as \\v^ frequency response of the system and is given by

-I Hijtti) =

hitye-^'^'dL

(3.121)

2ZS

Fourier Series Representation of Periodic Signals

Ctiap. 3

m Similarly, for discrele-time jiignals and systems, we focus in this chapter and

= Chapter 3 on values of i for which \z\ = J, so that z

e^^'^ and z" is of the form e^"'"^.

= Then the system function H{z} for z restricted to the forrri z e^'*' is referred tij as the

frequency response of the system and is given by

The response of an LTl system to & coiriple?^ exponential signal cif the to mi *^"^ (in comifiuous tinne) or ^^"'" (m discrete time) is paitLcutarly simple la express in terms of the
fretjuertcy response of the system, Fiuthermdre, as a result of tht superposition property
for LTl systems, we can express the resptinse of an LTl sigrtiil to a linear combiitatlon of complex exponentials with equal ease. In Chapters 4 and 5, we will see how wc can
use these ideas together with continuous-time and discrete-time Fourier tran^iforms to analyze the response of LTl systems lo aperiodic signals. In the remaintier of this chapter,
as a first look at this important set of concepts and results, we fi>c;us on interpretiag and
understanding this notion in the context of periodic signaJs. Consider first the continuous-ttme case, and let x{t\ he a penodic signal \^ith a
Fourier series representation given by

j^

I

MO X -

^f^^^*"""'-

(3.123)

Suppose that we apply this signal as the input to an LTl system with impulse reiponse
h{t). Then, since each of the complex exponentials in eq. (3J23) i^ an eigenfunction of
the system, ss in eq, (3. 1 3) with s/, = Jkn;>(i, it follows that the output is

2] yU) =

a^//(p^*"¯W*^'^'.

(3 124i

Thus, y{t) is also periodic with the same fundamental frequency as xO). Funhermore, if
{a^} is the set of Fourier series coefficterus for the input x(t), then {aiHijhfjo)} is the set of coefficienLs for the output yU). That is, the effect of the LTl system is to modify mdjvidually each of the Fourier coefftci^ts of the input through tnultiplicaiion hy the value of the frequency response at the corresponding frequency.
Example 3.T6
Supfose that the periodic si.gnal jc{t) discussed in Exmnple 3,2 is the input signal to an LTl system with impulse response
H(f) =-e 'H(f).

Sec. 1&

Fourie' Series and LTI Systems

229

To calculate itie Fourier series coefficients of the output yit), we first compute the hequency re&ponset

+1

 - jta'V
-'e-

1

JOJ

1 '] -Ë jtii^

(3.125)

Therefnre, using eqs. (3.124) tuid (3.125^ toE^ther with the fad thai wu = Itt in thi^

-1
y<0- X**^'""'^

n.l26)

4 !^1 - jl^l'
^, = i/[_^J-^l\ 2\^l-y4ir|

' 4 ^i -^2Tr

^. _",^

_^

ii((^^.1 ^I
Z^^l- j47r

(3.127)

J^ote that y{s) must be a real-valued signal, since il is the convolution of Mt) anJ ii{t), which are both reaL This can be verified by exanumag eq. (3.127) atid observing that
m i^l = *-.t,ThcTeforE.>'(0 can also be expressed either of the forms given Id eqs. (3.31)
and (3.32); ihiit is,

3
y{t) ^ ] -^2^ Dt cos(27rjt/ +6^1
*-

(3-I2S)

Of

3

2^ v(0 = 1 +

[Ei CDS 2irkt-Fi iin Itrktl

(3.12^)

where

Ei+ bk - Dye'*^" =

jFt.

= ^

1, 2, 3.

These coefficients can be evaluated directly from eq. (3.n7). For example,

- - ;5[

\b\\

,

4vM + Att^

0, = <b\ - -tan"'(27r).

(3.130)

230

Fourier Series Repres0ntatk>n of Psriodic Signals

Chap. 3

In discrete tiirw, the leladonship between the Fourier series coefficients of the input and output of an LTI system exactly par^lels eqs. (3.123) and (3.124). Specific^aUy, let x[n\ be a periodic signal with Fourier scries representation given by

2! x[n\ =

flt^^'*^^'^'^

If we apply this signal as the input to an LTI system with impulse response h[Ti\, then, a^

J = it* eq. (3 6) With zt

f ^*^^''^''^\ the outDut is

= ^ y[n]

fl;f/(f^"='^*'^)f^*(2^^^^".

(3.131)

Tttus, y[n\ is also periodic with the same period as x[n]^ and the ith Fourier coefficient of
y[n] is the pioduci of the JUh Fourier coefficient of the input and the value of the frcquenc v response of the LTI system, Hie^^^^'^X at the corresponding frequency.

Exampfe 3.17

<a Consider an LTI system with impulse response hi"! - ar"uLn].-l

< 1^ and with

the input

j[n] = cosf^^ j.

(3.132)

As iri Example 3,10, x[n\ cam be written in Fountr scncs fofm as

Also, from eq. (3.122).

This geometric series can be evaluated using the result of Problem 1 .54, y]elding

Usiogcq, (3.L31), we then obtain the Fourier series for the output:

^ ^ ifjL j,j-,,|

i//Ljlir/JV|^j(:iT/.V)fl

;2^^]e !f2^i\)r

- 2 I ] a^-.'S^/^ J

2 \ 1 - fftf j2tw

(3. 135)

Sfic 3.9

FiH*fing

If w< write

then eq. (3 1 35) FBcLuces to

^ -
- '^^^'^

re-' ,

ae 1

y[n] - rcos(^rt +
<9J.

For example^ if Af = 4,

1

\

\ ,gH'tm i(A£

231
(3,135)

and thus,

-- Hr An] = .

COS

~ '^^ f*** '

We tiote that for expresstons such as eqs. (3.124) and (3.131) to tnalce sen^ Che

frequeticy responses Hijtit) andHie^'^) in eqs. (3 121) and (3.122) must be well defined

and finite. As we will sec In Chapters 4 and 5, this will be the cASe if the LIT systems

under consideradon are stable^ For example, the LTI system in Example 3 J 6. with impulse response h{r) = e~'i4({)^ is stable and has a well-defined frequency respond giveti by
eq. (3.125). On the other hand, an LTI system with impulse response A(r) = e'u[t) is

unstable, and it is easy to check that the integral iti eq. (3^121) for Hijtn) diverges for

any vaJue of cu. Similarly, the Lll system in Example 3.17, with impulse rcspotise h[til =

< cr"w[n], is st^le for fflf| 1 and has frequejicy response given by eq. (3.134). However,

> if |o:

1 , the system is unstable, and then the sumnuitioti in eq. (3 . 133) ^verges.

I

3,9 FILFERING

In a variety of applications, it is of interest to change the relative ampiimdes of the h^-

queticy components in a signal or perhaps eliimnate some frequency components entirely,

a process referred to 2&fiitermg. Linear time-tn variant systems that change the sh^je of the

spectrutn are often referred to as frequency-shaping jdters. Systems that are designed to

pass some tiiequencies essentially undi^torted and significantly attenuate or eliminate oth-

ers are refened to as frequÈncy-:seltt:ti^filttrs. As inddcaied by eqs. (3h 1 24) and (3.131),

the Fourier series coefficients of the output of an LTI system are those of the input multi-

plied by the frequency response of the system. Consequently, Altering can be coaveniently

accomplished thn^ugh the use of LTI systems with an appropriately chosen tiiequency re-

m^ods sponse^ ai>d frequency -domain

provide us with llie idea) tools to exanutie this

^ vet>' important class of applications. In this and

following two sections, we take a first

look at filtering through a few examples.

232

Fourier Serres Representation of Periodic Signals

Cliap, 3

3.9.1 Freq u e^cy-Sh^pi ng Filters

One application in which frequency -shaping filters are often encountered is audio sys-
tems. For exaniple, LTI filters are typically included in such systems to permit the listener to modify the relative amounts of low-frequencj energy (bass) and high -frequency energy (treble). These filters correspond to LTI sysiems whose irequency responses can be

changed by manipulating the tone controls. AJso, in high-fidelity audio systems, a so-called

equalizing filter is cften incladed in the preamplifier to compensate for the frequencyresponse characteristics of the speakers. Overall, these cascaded filtering stages are fre-

quently refeiTed to as the equalizing or equalizer circuits for the audio system. Figure 3,22 illustrates the three stages of the equalizer circuits for one parti cular series of audio speak-
ers In this figure, the magnitude of the frequency response for each of these stages is shown

on a log-log plot. Specifically, the magnitude is in units of 201ogi(j |/f(/ai)|, referred to as
decibels or dB. The frequency axis is labeled in Hz (i.e., <a{2TT} along a logarithmic scale. As will be discussed in more detai I in Section 6. 2 .3 , a logarithmic displ ay of the magnitude
of the frequency response in this form is conunon and useful.

Taken together, the equahzing circuits in Figure 3.22 arc designed to conipcnsate for the frequency response of die speakers and the room in which they are located and to allo^^

the listener to control the overall frequency response. In particular, since the three sy stems

are connected in cascede, and since each system modifies a complex exponential input

Ke^*^J by multiplying it by the system frequency lesponse at that frequenL;y, it follows that

the overall frequency response of the cascade of the three systems is the productof the three
frequency responses. The fir^t two filters, indicated in Figures 3.22(a) and (b), together

tnake up the control stage of the system, as the freqitency behavior of these filters can be

edjustedby the listener. The third filter, illustrated in Figure 3,22(c), is the equalizer stage, which has the fixed ft-equency response indicated. The filter in r^gure 3-22(a) is a lowfrequency filter controlled by a two-position switch, to provide one of the two frequency

responses iiidicated. The second Pterin the control stage has two continuously adjustable

slider switches to vary the frequency response within the limits indicated in Figure 3, 22(b),

Amther class of frequency-shaping Ulters often encountered is that for which the

^ filter output is the derivative of the filter input, i.e., yit) dx{tydt. With t(0 of the form

= x{i)

e^*^*, y(r) will be y\t) = j<t>e^'^\ from which it follows that che frequency response

is

= ffij<a)

JOJ.

(3.137)

The fi^uency response ctiaracteri sties of a thfferentiatmg filter are shown in Figure 3.23. Since //(joi) is complex in general, and in this example in particular, Hijw) is frequently disp^layed (as in the figure) as separate plots of \H{j(i>)\ and <if(jw). The shape of this fi^equency response implies that a complex exponential input e^*^^ will receive greater amplification for larger vdues of ca. Gonsequendy, differendating filters are useful in enhancing
rapid variations or transitions in a signalOi>e purpose for which differentiating filters are often used is to ctihance edges in
picture processing. A black-and-white picture can be thought of as a two-dimensional
"continuous-time" signal *(/]£ t^), where f| and tz are the horizontal and vertical coordinates, respectively, and A(r|, f^) is the brightness of the image. If the image is repeated periodically in the horizontal and vertical <hrections, then it can be represented by a two dimensional Fourier series <see Problem 3.70) consisting of sums of products of complex

--

h25

--T r^n n

1

\

^

---- r^r r^-r
\

2D -I-

H-15

Swikc"h position 1

S ^^

m1.

D

S'lMT'ch posrtion 2

- 10

-15

LI

20Hr 30 JO 60 10O 230

- J

L

L

400 600 1KHI

Frequency

J

L-L

I

3 4 6 e 10

20

i25

1-n-

Lcswer lirr^it

-IS

1

t

1^ L_

JL

X

20HE30iO &0 100 2D0 400 eOO '^hMr

3 4 6 G1D

20

Fr&quency

+ 25 r

TT

f

--TT [

I

1

2OHi30 4D 60 100 2C£

FreqiutoTjCy

Figure 3.22 Maflnjtud^s Of the frequency fesponses of the e<\uali¨f circuFts for one padlciilar series of audio speakers, shown on a scala of 20loflJW{/fl>)|. which iÈ feffrrred to as a decibel (or dB) scale, (a) Lowfrequsncy filter controJIed by a two-position switcti; (t) upper and lower frequency limits on a contnuousty adjustable sliaping filter; (o) i\vsd
frequency response of t^ie equalrier $ta{je.

233

234

Fourier Series Representation of PeriocJpc Signals

Cfiap 3

Ki*-)

4.H0i^)

Figure 3.23 Charactenstics of the
trequency response of a filler for which the oulpLJt is the derivative of the m-
:>ut.

m exponentials, i^-'^^'- and e^"'-'^-, that osdllaie ^t possibly different frequenL'ics e?sCh of
the two coordiii^ite diret:tions, .Slt>w variatiojis. it^ brightness in a particular directi{iii are represented by the lower harmonics in that direction, h'or example, consider an edge corresponding to a sharp trai^RitSon in bnghmess that runs vertically in an image. Since the brightness is constant or slowly varying along the edge, the fretjuency content of iht edge in the vertical direction is concentrated at low frequencies In contrast, since there is an abrtipr variation in brightness across the edge, the frequency content (if the edge in the hfiri/ontai direction is conLientrated at higher frequencies, f-igure 3.24 iiluitrates the effeLt on an image of the twy-dimensional equivalent of a differentiating tiJfer" higure 3.24taj shows two ongmal images and Figure 3.24(b> the result of processing those images with
the filter Since the derivative al die edge.s of a pii:ture is greater than in regions whtare the brightness varies jiltiwly with di^tance^ the cficct of the filter is to enharite the edge5,
Discrete-time LTl fillers also find a hrt>yd array of applications. Many ^lf these in-
volve the use of discrete-time systems, iinplemetited using general- or special- purpose
digital proceysors£ to process continutius-time signals, a topic we discuss at some length in
Chapter?. In addition, the analysis of time series information, including demographic data
and economic data sequences such as the stock tnarket average, comraonW involves the
use of d]SCTete-titne filtersi. Often the long-term variations (which correspond to low frequenciej^) have a different significance than the short-term variations (which ct>rrespoTid to high frequencies), and it is useful to analyse these components separately. Reshaping the rektive weighting ol the romponeuLs is typJcaJly acci?mpJishetl using diicrete-Iimc filters.
As one example of a simple discrete -u me filter, consider an LTI sjstem Chat succes-
sively takes a two-point average of the input values:

jI"1 = ^{4>i] + j^fri - m.

(3.n8)

^Specifically each image in Fi^urv 3.2Mb) is llie m^gniludc oi ihc iwo-dinien^i^nal ^riiJiecit I'nf its ctmnterpart image in Figure 3 34(a) where the gradient (if fix, >0 i& defined as
]tf-^P[^iJ

Sec. 3.9 FIJ taring

?35

IfDi)?tYhJe^

^'^u *
resurtct

^^*^ ¯^ ^ diffe¨ntiating fflter or an image' (a) two ortflinal
processing the origir>al images wifti a differentiating filter.

imaaes-

5^ - In this case h[n] = \(3[n] +
response of the system is

1]).

and

from

eq.

(3.1 22j,

we

see

that

the

fr^iuencv
/

m^n = ^[I + ^"^"J = *^-^"^cos<^/2).

(3.1 39)

The magmtude of J/f^^-) is plotted ii, Figure 3 J5Ca). and <H(^r^} h shown in Figure

J.25(b). As discussed in Section 1,3,3, low frequencies ibr discrete-time complex txpo-

nenti^soccuniear^ = w a Ý2^, Ý4^.. .., and high frequencies near = Ý77 Ý377

msisa:esukofthefacttliatf-'tc..2x,. ^ .^-^sothatindl^etetimeweneed onlvVon-

aider a iTT interval of values oft. in order us cover a complete range of distinct discrete-

time frequencies. As a consequence, any discrete-time frequency lesponses
be periodic wtth period 27r, a fact that can also be deduced directly from eo

/f (^^-) must (3 122}

t.1h. at

.^f^^Pf^^^^*i^**^^^fi'^i'i^s meJ^)\ ,s large for frequencies near

(3.138) and
= ai and

(3.139), we see from Figure
decrease* as \ve increase |w[

125(a) toward

TT mdicatmg that higher frequericies are attentuated more dian lower ones For exam-

ple, if the mput to this system is constant--i.e., a lervfrequency complex e;tponential

2^6

Fourier Seffes R^resematim] of Periodic Signal

Gftap. 3

i^

figure 3.2S <a) Uagnitjde ard
(h) pt^ase fof the trequencg^ respori^ of the discrat^tfrne LTi system

jt[.n] ^ ITfJ*^" ^ ^--thenUie output wQl be

K ^ 7[fll - ;^(^^'¨)^^^'^"

^ x[7il

On the other hand, if the input is (tie high-frequency signal xln] - Ke^^'^ - JC(- 0".
thOT the output v/iix be

Thus, this system separates out the bng-term conistAnt vaJxie of a signaJ from its highfrequency ftuctuaiions and, cou&squ&nt] y, represems a first exaniple of frequervcy-selecii ve ihlrering, a itjpic sve Look at more carefully in the next subsection.
3.9.2 Frequency-Selective Filters
F¨queRcy-seiei:tjv¨ fttos ajTt a <^[ass of filters spedficaily intended to acctsrafely or
approximately select some bands of frequfrjici^^s anfj reject otfcters. Ths use of frequeeicy-
seicctive fillers arise* tc a variety of situations. For example, if noise iir aft audicr recording is iti ^ higher frequency band than Che mo^ic f>r voic:e on. the t^ce^ding is, it c^n be
removed by (requeacy-^lective fijferijtg. Another in^^Ttant ^^hoation of fireqiKncys^fecUve iiltcfs is in communication systems. As wfc di^n^s in cEe^J in Chftpier B, tiie basis for amplitude modulation (AM) g^s^ms is the transmi^isicn of mformatton ^ii' ttiany diffetettt sources fti^ultajieowsly by puttiins the infoi^nation from each <;hafiii^I inio ^ ^eparmi^ fceqiicncy b¨wi asid tsbraciiftg (fee iodiv jd¨a) cEwssnels or bards ai the receiver
using freqaeney-selftctive filteo. Prequency-s#lective ftlterfifor se|>ar^ing the individual

Sec. 3.9 RItering

237

channels and frequency-shaping filters (such as the equaJiz&r illustrated In Figure 3,22)

for adjusting the quality of the tone form a major part of any home radio and tele^sion

receiver.

While frequeticy selectivity is not the only issue of concern in applications, it^ broad

h^ in^xirtaitte

led to a widely accepted set of terms describing the characteristics of

frequency- sekctive filters. In particular, while ttie nature of the frequenciejs to be passed by a frequency-selective filter varies considerably from application to application, several

basic types of filter are widely used and have been given names mdicative of their func-

-- tion. For example, ^iowpussfilter is a filter that passes low frequencies i,e-, frequencies

= -- A around ii>

and attenuates or rejects higher frequencies. highpa^s filter is a filter

th&t passes liigh frei^uencies and attertuates or tejects low ducs, and a bandpass filter is a

filtef that passes a band of frequencies and attenuates frequencies both higher and lower

than those in the band that is passed. In each case^ the cutofffrequencies are the frequen-

cies defining the' boundaries betw&en frequencies that are passed and frequencies that are
-- m rejected i,e., the frequencies the passband and stophand.

Numerous questions arise in defining and assessing the quality nf a frequency-

How How selective filter.

effective is the filter at passing frequencies in the passband?

How effective is it at attentuating frequencies in the .¨itopband?

sharp is the transition

-- near the cutoff firequency i.e^* from nearly free of distortion in the passband to highly

attenuated in the stopband? Each of these questions involves a comparison of the charao-

tenstics of an actual frequency-selective filter with those of a filter with idealised behavior.

Specifically, an ideal frequency-selective Jilteris a. filter that exactly passes complex ex-

ponentials at one set of frequencies without any distortion and completely rejects signals

at all other frequencies. For example, a continuous-time ideal lowpa.ss filler wirh cutoff

w frequency w^ is an LTl system that passes complex exponentials e^*^^ for values of in the

^ ^ range -- Wt

<t>

<iic ^TMf rejecui signals at all other frequencies. That is, the frequency

response of a continuous-time ideal lowpas.*^ filter is

H(£ = f ;,

> "'

Y\

'

^3 140)

as stiown in Figure ^,26.

H{ja>l 1

^--- -- -- -- -^Stoptjand--

Passband 4-. stopbanb -

<

I

Figure 3.26 Frequency response of
an ideal lowpass fJlter.

Figure. 3.27(a) depicts the frequency response of an ideal continuous-time Tiighpass
filter with cutoff frequency cu^, and Figure 3.27(h) illustrates an ideal continuous-time bandpass filter with lower cutoff frequency iA^\ and upper cvit<>ff frequency w^Zr Note that
each of these filters is symmetric about ai = 0* and thus, there appear to be two passbands
for the highpass and bandpass filters. This is a consequence of our having adopted the

.

2BB

HOw)
1

Fourier Series Representation ot Periodtc Signals

CHap. 3

(a)

"C2

I
1 -^

"ci

'c1

(b>

'£*c2

Figure 3.27 (a) Frequency response of an !<}eal highpass finer;
{b) frequency response of an kjeal tuandpass filter.

use of the compie?( ^xponentia] signal e^'^K nuher than the sinusoidal signals sinwr and

= -- cos tuf, at frequency M. Since ^-^"^

cosa>t + j sin<at and e'^*^' = cosoit j sin <(>r both

of these complex exponentials are composed of sinusoidal signals at die same frequency at

For this reason^ we usually define idea! filters so that they have the symmetric ti^uency

response behavior seen in Figures 3.26 and 3.27,

In a similar fashion, we can define the corresponding sat of ideal discrete-tinie

frequency-selective filters, the frequency r^spons(iS for \vhich are depicted in Rgure 3.28.

H^

n

.__c

-2-n

H{e!^

-2n -2i

(b)
mn
(c)

Èff
Figure 3.28 Discret¨-time ideal
frequancy-selwtive itters: (a) lov^>ass; [b) highpdss; (c) bandpass.

Sec. 3.10

Examptes of Continuous-Time Filters OescriCed by Orfferentiai EquaUons

239

In particular. Figure 3.28(a) depicts an ideal discrete-time lowpass filter, Figure 3.2^(b) is an ideal highpas^: filter, and Figure 3.2a(c) is an ideal bandpass filter. Note tbat, as discussed in the preceding section, the characteristics of the continuaus-dme and discretetime ideal filters differ by virtue of the fact that, for discrete-time filters, the frequency
response /f(^> ) must be periodic with period 2ir, with low frequencies near even multiples of IT and high frequencies near odd multiples of tt.
As wc will see oia numerous occasions, ideal filters are quite useful in describing ide-
alised system configurations for a variety of applications. However, they are not realizable in practice and must be approximated. Furthermore, even if ihey could be realized, st>Tne ot the characteristics of ideal filters might make them undesirable for particulai' applications, and a nonideal filter might in fact l^e preferab^CH
In detail, the topic of filtering encompasses many issues, including design and imple-
mentation. WMle we wiU not delve deeply into the details of filter design methodologies,
in the remainder of this chapter and the following chapters we will see a number of other
examples of both ccntinuous-time and discrete-time filteft and will develop tive concepts and techniques that form the basis of this very important engineering discipline.

3 JO EXAMPLES OF CONTINUOUS-TIME FILTERS DESCRIBED
BY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
In many applications, frequency-selective filtering is accompUshed through the use of LTT systems described by linear constant-coefficient differential or difference equations. The reasons for this are numerous. For example, many physical systems that can be inter-
preted as perfoniiii^ filtering operations are characterized by differential or difference
A equations. good example of this that we will examine in Chapter 6 is an automobile
suspension system, which in part is designed to filter out high-fircquency bumps and ir-
A Tegularities in road surfaces. second reason for the use of filters described by differen-
tial or difference equations is that they are conveniently implemented using either analog or digital hardware. Furthermore, systems described by differential or difference equations offer an extremely broad and flexible range of designs^ allowing one, for example, to produce filters that are close to ideal or that possess other desirable characieristics. In
this and live next section, we consider several examples that illuJitrate the implementation
of continuoua-time and discnete-tinie frequency-selective filters through the use of dif-
ferential and difference eqtiations. In Chapters A-6, we will see other examples of these classes of filters and will gain additional insights into the properties that make them so use-
ful.

A 3. 1 0.1 Simple HC Lowpass Filter

Electrical circuits are widely used to implement continuous-time filtering operations. One

RC of the simplest examples of such a circuit is the first-order

circuit depicted in Fig-

ure 3.29, where the source voltage Vj(/) is the system input. Tbis circuit can be used to

perfonn either a lo^ipa&s or highpass filteriug operation, depending upon what we take

as the output signal. In paJticular, suppose that we take the capacitor voltage v^(f) as the

output. In this case, the output voltage is related to the input voltage through the linear

240

'

fourter Series RepresBnUtioir of Periodic Signals

Chap. 3

Vflffl

VcW

F^gon J.29 Rret-order HC Tim.

constant- coefEic tent difTertntial equation

(3.U1)

As^umii^ initial rest, the system described by eq. (3,141) is LT1. In order to determine
= its frequency response Hij(i>\ we note that£ by definition, with input voltage v,(r) e^*^'. we must have the output voltage Vc(f) = /fO'w)*^''Mf*c substitute these expression into
eq, (3.141K weobtain

/iC^[//(£eJ*^'] + /?OQjk^"' = ?^\
or

fiT>in which it follows directly that

= + IIij*^)e'"'

1 ,J*UJ
1 RCJo?

or

(3442)
(3.143) (3.t44)

HU*^) -

1

1 + RCjof

(3J45)

The magnitude and phase of the frequency response H(jw} for Ehis example are
¨ shown in Figure 3.30. Note that for frequencies ncar<w = 0. |//(yw>l 1, while for larger

values of <(> (positive or negative), |//(yctj)| is considerably smaller and in fact steadily

RC decreases as \ai\ increases. Thus, this simple

filter (with ^^(0 as output) is a nonideal

lowpass Qlter.

To provide a first glimpse at the trade-offs involved in filter design^ tet \xs briefly

consider the time-domain behavior of the circuit, hi pamcular, the impulse response of the

syEtem described by eq. 4 (3. 1 1 ) is

hm= -^^-'^*^u(fx

(3,146)

Sec, 3 10

Examples of Continuous-TlmG FrIIers Described by Difts'ential EquatFons

24]

-1/RC
fa)

1/RC

4.iiU^) -TT/a

^^>x

-1/RC C

ti

-n/A

---fl/2

Figui? 3.30 (a] Magnitude and (b) phase plots tor the frequency response
d loi Iht RC circuit Fgura 3.29 w'rtti oirtput tt(0

and the step response is

5(0-11-^ -?/¨c )"<0.

(3.147)

both of which are plotted in Figure 3.31 (wheie t = RC}. Coitipanng Figures 3.30 and 331, we see a fundamental crade-ofT SpeciUcally, suppose that we would like our filter

to pass only very low frequencies. From Figure 3,3l>(aJ, this implies that 1/RC must be

RC small, or equivalently, that

is large, so that ^quencies [Hther than the low ones of

interest will be attentuated sitftjcientty- However, looking at Figure 3.31(b), ^^e see that

RC if

is IsLTge, then the step vesptmse will Uke a considerable amount of litne to reach its

long-term value of J . That is, (he system responds sluggishly to the step input. Conversely,

if we wish to have a Faster step response, we need a smaller value of RC. which in turn

implies that die filter will p^s higher frequencies^ This type of trade-offbetween behavior

in the frequency domain and in the time domain is typical of the issues arising in the dosign

and analysis of LT! systems aiid filteisimd is a subkject we will look at more carefully in

Chapter 6.

3.10.2 A Simple ITC Hlghpass Filter

RC As an alternative to choosing the capacitor vgltage as the crtjtpul in our

circuit, we can

choose the voltage across the resistor In this case, the differentia equation relating input

242

--

Fou rler Series Rep resentation of Peilodii; Signals

Chap. 3

(a>

Figure 3.J1 {i) Impulse response

of tha first-order f^C lowp^s lilt^r wFth
T ^ flC; (b) step response of RC ^ow-

(b)

pass filter with t = RC.

and output is

-- -- RC = /ft :

+ v^(t)

dt

di

0.148)

We can find the frequency response G(jw) of this system in exactly the same way ^ve did

vM = in the previous case: If v,^{t) = e^*^\ then we must have

GOoiJe-'^'; substituting

these expressions into eq, (3.148J and performing a bit of aJgebra^ we find thai

G(;^) = ja*RC 1 + JwRC'

(3J 49)

TTie magnitude and phase of this frequency response are shown in Figure 3 J2, From the
-- figure., we see thattiic system attenuates lower frequencks and passes hi^ier frequencies
i.e., those for which \fit\ ^:^ MfiC with minimal attenuation. TTiat is, this system acts as
a nonidea] highpass hlter
As with the lowpass ft1ter£ the parameters of the circuit control both the frequency
response of the highpass filter and its time respon&e characteristics. For example, consider
= the step resptinse for the filter. From Figure 3,29, we see that Vr(0 VsiO ~ ^Af) Thus,
if ^j(0 -- w(0> ^<. (0 must be given hy eq. (3.147). Consequently, the step response of the
hi^Pf^s filter is

Mr) = e-'"''^u{tX

OA50)

RC which is depicted in Figure 3.33, Consequently, as

is increased, the response becomes

-- more sluggish i.e., the step response takes a longer time to reach its long-term value

Sec. 3.10

Examples of CotitinuDus-Timc Filters Described by Differential Equations

1G[ja>>|

243

-i;rc
la)

(b)
Figune 3.32 (a^ Magnitude and (b) phase ptots for the frequency response
d of tfie flC circuit Figure 3.29 with oirtpirt Vf{t).

Figure 3.33 Step response of tlis

PC first-ordCf

highp^ss filter wFth

T = RC

of 0. From Figure 3.32. we see that mcreasing RC (or equivalently, decreasing IJRC)

also affects the frequency response, specificalty, it ext-ends the passband down to Ji>wer

frequencies.

We RC ohserv'e from ttte cwo examples in this section ttiat a simple

circuit can serve

as a rough approximation ti> a highpass or a lowpasi filter, depending upon the choice of the

physical output vaviable. As illustrated in Problenti 3 .7 L , a simple mechanical system using

a mass and a mechanical dampercan also serve as a lowpas."* i>r highpass filter described by

244

Fourier Series Representation of Periodic Signals

Chap. 3

analogous tirst-order differentia] equaLions. Becatise of their simplicity, these examptes of

electrical and mechanical fibers do not have a sharp transition from passband ^o stopband

RC and, in fact, have only a single parameter (natncly,

in the electrical case) that con-

trols both Che frequency response and time response behavior of the system. By designing

more complex filters, implemented using more energy storage elements {capacitances and

inductances in electrical filters and springs and damping devices in mechanical filters),
we obtain ftltere described by higher order differential equations. Such filters offer con-

siderably more flexibility in terms of their characterisiics, allowing, for example, sharper

passband-stopband transition or more control over the trade-offs between time response

and freqiacncy response.

3.M EXAMPLES OF OJSCRETE-TtME FILTERS DESCRIBED BY DIFFERENCE EQUATfONS
As with their continuous-time counterparts, discreie-dme filters described by linear
ccjnsiant-coefficient difference equations are of considerable importance in practice. In-
deed, smce they can be efficiently implemented in special- or general -puipose digital systems^ filters described by difference equations are widely used in practice. As jn al-
most all aspects of signal and system analysis, when we examine discrete-lime filters
described by difference equations, we find both strong similarities and important differences wiih the continuous-time case. In particular, discrete-time LTI systems described by difference equations can either be recursive and have impulse responses of infinite Icngdi <11R systems^ or b& nonrecursive and have finite-length impulse responses {FIR systems). The former are the direct counterparts of continuous-time systems described by differential equacions illustrated in the previous section, while the latter are also of
considerable practical importance in digital systems. These two classes have distinct sets of advantages and disadvantages in terms of ease of implementation and in terms of the order of filter or the complexity required to achieve particular design objectives. In this
section we limit ourselves to a few simple examples of recursive and nonrecursive filters, while in Chapters 5 and 6 we develop additional tools and insights that allow us to analyze
and understand the properties of these systems in more detail,

3. T t . 1 First-Order Recursive Discrete-Time Filters

The discrete-time counterpart of each of the ftrst-order filters considered in Section 3.10 is the LTI system describ¨j by the first-order difference equation

y[¨]-^y[f?- 1] = x\nl

(3.151)

From the eigenfunction pmperty of complex exponential sigrals, we know that if x[n] = ^-f"", then y[n] = Hie^'^)e^'^", where Hie^'^) is the frequency response of the system.
Substituting into eq. (3.151X we obtain

or

[1 - ae >*']ff(e^^)eJ'^" = ^'^¨.

(3 153)

Sec. 3,1 1

Examples of Discrete-Time Filters Oescnbed t>y Difference Equations

so that

Z45

The jnagnitude and phase of //(^^") are shown in Figure 3. 34(a) for a = 0.6 and in Figure 3.34(b) for^ = --06. Weobserve that, for the positive value of rt, the difference equation
(3.151) behaves like a lowpass 6Lter with minimal attenuation of low frequencies near
= <ii and increasmg attenuation as we increase È[> toward È[£ - tt. For ttie negative value of^> the system is a highpass (iUer, passing ti^quencies near <ti = tt and attenuating lower
< frequencies. In fact, for ariy positive value of a 1, the system approximates a lowpass > filter, and for any negative value of c -- 1, the system apfffoximates a highpass filter,
where l^l controls the size of the filter passband, with brcxader passbands as l^j is increased.
As with the contmuous-time exan^ies, we again have a trade-off between time do-
main and frequency domain chaiacteri sties. In particular, the impulse response of the system described t>y eq. (3.1 51) is

h[n] = a"u[nl
= The step response s[n] u[n] ñ h[n] is
sin] = ^1 TM-1 ----0"^a+^'u[n]

(3.155) (3.156)

From these expressions, we see that la\ also controls the speed with which the impulse and
step responses approach their long-term values, with faster responses for smaller values

of \a\, and hence, for filters with smaller passbauds. Just as with differential equations,

higher order recursive difference equations can be used to provide sharper filter characteristics and to provide more flexibility in balancing time-domain and freqiiency -domain

constraints.

Finally, note from eq. (3,155) that the system described by eq. (3. 151) is unstable

^ if |a|

I and thus does not have a finite response te complex exponential tnpuu^. As we

stated previously, Fourier-based methods and frequency doirtain analysis focus on systems

with finite respenscs to complex exponentials; henoe, for examples such as eq, (3,1 5 1), we

restrict ourselves to stable systems.

3,11.2 Nonrecursiv¨ Difcret&Time Filters The general fonn of an FIR nonrecursive di^rence equation is

X yM = M["-^] k-=-N

(3 157)

W That is, the output y[n] is a weighted average of the <N -I-

-I- I) values of jc[n| from

x[n - M] through x[n + JV], with the weights given by the coefficients b^r Systems of

this form can be used to meet a broad array of filtering ohjecrives, including Frequency-

selective filtering.

-- One frequently used example of such a filter is a moving-average filter, where the

no-- output y[jt] for any n say,

is an average of values of x[n] in the vicinity of jIq. The

<H(e*^

246

Figure 3.34 Frequency response

of the lirst-Drder recurs^ discrete-

^ tfme filter of eq. {1151): (a) a 0.6;

(b)

= (b) s -0.6.

Sec 3 11

Examples of Discrele-Tims Filters Described by Difference Ecjuations

247

basic idea is that by averaging values Locally, rapid high-frequency components of the in-
put will be averaged out and lower frequency variations ^vijl be retained, coriesponding to
A smix)thing or lowpass filtering the original sequence. simple two-point moving-average
filter was briefly introduced in Section 3,9 [eq. (3.138)J. An only slighdy more complex
example is the three-point moving-average filter, which is of the form

yN = ^(x[n - l]-^ x[n] + x[n + 11),

(3 158)

so that each output >[nl is the average of three consecutive input values. In this case,
- ft[il = Us[n + tj + 6fn] + S[n I]],

and thus, from eq. (3. 122)^ the corre.sponding ftequency response is

^Ce^") = \[e''^ + \ +e-^'^] = 1(1 -I-2C0SW).

(3.159)

The ma^itudt of Hief"^) is sketched in Figure 3.35. We observe that the filter has the
general characteristics of a lowpass filter, although, as with the first-order recursive filter, it does not have a sharp transition from passband co stopband.

|H{^*")|

n
I

w 2-17

Figure 3.35 Magnitude Of the frfl-
Qii¨ncy response of i three-point moving-average lowpass fitter.

The three-point moving-aveiage filter in eq. (3.158) ha* no parameters that can be changed to adjust the effective cuioff frequency. As a generaliiation of this moving-
^ M -- average fiJten we can consider averaging over + + 1 neighboring points that is,
using a difference equation of the form

^i-^ = 7nri^X/i''-*]k = -f>/

(3.160)

M = The corresponding impulse response is a rectangular pulse (i.e., A[n]

\f{N Ë

+ I)

= for-N <r n ^ M, and h[fi\

otherwise). The filter's frequency response is

^
1
i--/y

(3.161)

Z4S

Fourter Series Representatoor> of Periodic Signals

Chap. 3

The summation in eq. (3. 16 L) can be evaluated by perfMtinmg calc^ilalions similar to those in Example 3.12, yielding

H{e^'^} =
+ JV Af -f I

siii(fl^/2)

(3.J62)

N M By adjusting the siie> + -h 1, of the averaging window we can vary the cutoff fre-
quency. For example, the magnitude of //(e-'*^) is shown in F^ure 3. 36 for A/ +/^+ 1 = 33
^ and Af + +1 - 65,

!H(^

|H(^*^|

-Tt

j
-TI/2

. ^r.^.^SjWV/ytfl lb)

*--

Figure a,36 Magnitude of the rrequeficy response for the lowpass movjnc-

= = = aver^se filter of eq. (3.162): (a) Af = /V

16; (b) Af

V

32.

NoiiFecursLve filters can also be used to perform higl^>a5s tiltjcring operations. To
illustrate this, again with a simple e;tample, consider the difference equation

-- = y[n]

- jc[n] j([n

I]

(3.163)

For input signals that are approximately constant, the value of y[n] i^ close to zero. For input signals that vary greatly from sample to sample, the values of yln) can be ex-

Sec 3. "12

Summary

Z49

peeled to have larger amplitude. Thus, the systetti described by eq. (3 J63) approximates
a highpasi filtering operation, attenuating slowly varying low-frequency components and
passing rapidly varying higher ftequeticy components with litlle attenuaiion To see this
more precisely we Qced to look ai the system's frequency response. In this case, ft[n] = i{8\n] - d[n - 1]}, so that direct application uf eq, (3,122) yields

0.164)
In Figure 3.37 we have plotted the tnagnitude oi Hi.e^'^), showing that this simple
syst&ui approximates a highpass filter, albeit one with a very ^adual Iraniiition from pass-
band to stopband. By considering more general nonrecursive filters, we can achieve far
m sharper transitions lowpass, highpass, and other frequency-selective fillers.

Figure 3.37 Frequency response of
a simple htghpass filler.

Note tliat. since the impulse response of any FIR system is of finite length (i.e.,

-N M from eq. (3.157), h[fi] = b,, for

^n^

and otherwise), it is always absolutely

> summable for any choices of the h,,. Hence, all such filters aie stable. Ahso. if A^

in eq, (3,157), the system is noncausal, since y[n] then depends on future values of the

input. In some applications, such as those involving the processing of previously recorded

signals, causality i& not a necessary constraint, and thus, we are free to use filters with
N j> 0. \j\ others, such as many involving real-time processing, causality is essential, and
in such case.s we must take IV ^ 0.

3.12 SUMMARY

In this chapter, we have introduced and developed Fourier series representatJonEi; for both

continuous-time ^nd discrete-time systems and have used these representations to take a

first look at one of the very important applications of die methods of signal and system

analysis, namely, filtering. In particular, as we discussed in Section 3,2, oife of die primary

motivations for the use of Fourier .';enes is the fact that complex exponential signals are

We eigenfunctiona of LTl systems.

have also seerij in Sections 3.3-3.7, that any pericwiic

-- signal of practical interest can be represented in a Fourier series i.e., as a weighted sum

250

Fourier Series Representation of Periodic SrgnaJs

Chap. 3

of hamiDnically rehtted compLe}^ exponentials that share a common period with the signal being represented. In addjtitjri, we have seen that the Fourier series representation has a number Df Important properties which describe how different characterii^tics of signals arc

reflected in their Fourier series coefficients.
One of the most important properties of Fourier series is a direct consequence of the
eigenfunctton property of complex e?iponentiab. Specificaliy, if a periodic signal is appli^ to an LTl system, then the output will be periodic with the same period, ax^d each

of the Fourier coefficients of the output is the corresponding Fourier coefficient of \hs
input multiplied by a complex number whose value is a function of the frequency coire-

spotiding to th^ Fourier coefficient. This function of frequency is characteristic: of the LTJ
system and is referred to as the frequency response of the system. By examining the frequency response, we were led directly to the idea of filtering of signals tising LTI systems, a concept that has nunierous applications, including several that we have descriljed. One

important class of applications involves the noti<?n of frequency-selective filtering--i.e.,

the idea of using an LTI system to pass certain specified hands of frequencies and stop

We or significantly attentuate others.

mtroduced the concept of ideal frequency- selective

filters and also gave several examples of frequency-selective filters described by linear

constant-coefficient differential or difference equations.

The purpose of this chapter has been to begin the process of developing both the tools of Fourier analysis and an appreciaiiox^ for llie utility of diese tools in applicmions. It\

the chapters that follow, we: continue with this agenda by developing the Fourier iransform

representations for aperiodic signals in continuous and discrete time and by taking a deeper

look not only at filtering, but also at other important applications of Fourier metheds.

Chapter 3 Problems
The fii^t section of problems belongs to the basic category and the answers are provided in the back of tiie book. The remaining three sections contain problems bolonging
to the basic, advanced, and extension categories, respectively,

BASIC PROBLEMS WfTH ANSWERS

A 3*1. continuous-time periodic signal jc(/) is real valued and has a fundamental period
T = 8. The nonzerr Fourier series coefiicicnts for jc{t) are

a^ = = flj

^-[ = 2. Uii

-- 4/

Express xiO in the form

2^ x{r) =

+ Aft cos(tUjtf fpk)^

k -II

A 3J, discrete-time penodic signal JfL'*^) is real valued and has a fundamental period
N - 5r The nonzero Fourier series coefficients for jclnl are

.

Chap. 3

Problems

Express n jr[ | in the form

^ jc[n] = Ao +

Aj sin(wtrt + 4'kl

33, For the continuous-time periodic signaJ

25 T

determine the fundamental fiequcncy io^ and the Fouri&r series coefVicients ajc such
thiit

X r(0 =

"*^''

3.4- Use the Fourier series analysis equation (3,39) to calculate the coefficients at, for
the continuous-ttme periodic signal

^(o-IrL?5,. [-1.5,

v1 ^^^t;t :^

with fundamental frequency wo = tt.
3,5. Let xi(/) be a continuous-time periodic signal with fundamental frequency oji and Fourier coefficients Qt Given that

how is the fundamental frequency oj; of ^^^(r) related to ij|?Aiso, find a relationship between the Fourier series coefficients hi^ cf Jf2(/) and the coefficients a^ . You may
use the properties listed in Table 3. 1
3.6* Consider three continuous-time periodic signals w^hose Fourier series represeniations are as follows:

iO)

Jt --KXl

-- ^3(0 = 2:^ ;sin

e^*^^

JJtt----l1f0]0

\ '^ /

Use Fourier series properties to help answer the following questions: (a) Which of the three signals is/are real valued? (b) Which of the three signals is/are even?
T 3,7, Suppese the periodic signal xir] has ftindamental period and Fourier coefficients
Of^. In a variety of situations, it is easier to calculate the Fourier series coefficients

.

2S2

Fourier Series Represenrtalion o! Penodic Signals

Chap.

b^ for giO = dxirVdt, as opposed to calcuJating at directly. Given that x{f)dt = 2,

find an expression for aj^ in terms of i?jt and T. You may use any of ibe properties
listed in Table 3.1 to help find the expression.
3,8* Suppose we are given the following information about a signa] xif):

1. x(t) ts r^&\ and odd.

1=2 2. x(t) is periodic with period

and has Fourier coefficients <Jt,

> - 3. fli

Oforlitj

L

Specify two different signals that satisfy these conditions.

3.9, Ui;e the anal>sis equation (3,Q5) to evaluxice the numerical valuer of one period of the Fourier series coefficients of the perio<iic signal

^ = Jflrtl

{AS[n - Am\ + ^{n - 1 - Am\l

N 3.10, Let jc[wj be a real and odd periodic signal with period =- 7 and Fourier coefficients
ajt. Given that

= = <^15

J- tilt = ^J-ai7

3/

determine the values of iio> tj^-u ^-i-, and a^^.
3.11, Suppose we are given the following information about a signal x[n]:

1. jc[rt] is area! and even signal, 2. ;ic[fi] has period JV = 10 and Fourier coefficients at
3. an = 5.

n=

Show that x[n] = A cos(Bn + C\ and specify numerical values for the constants A,
C B, and

^ 3.12, Each of the two sequences x\ [n] and Jf2[n] has a period = 4, and the correspond-

ing Fourier series coefficients are specified as

--

jTiln] *.

^ ajt,

-- i^tnl * * fc^.

where

^ = = = - ^3 ' i^^i = :^^2

and 1

/j\)

bi

= hi

b^ -^ i^

Using the multiplicatioTi property in t^ble 3 A , determme the Fourier series cvjeffi-
o cients for the si^al ^{ti\ -- X\[n\x2in\.

Chap. 3

Problems

253

3.13* Consider a ctmtinuous-time LTI system whose frequency response is

hir^e-^'^'dt = siji(4<(i>
ta

If the input to this system is a periodic i^ign^

^ f<4 4 :^ r<8

with period T = 8, determine the corresponding system output ydY

3.14. When the impulse train

^X

= i[rt]

S[n- 4i]

is the input to a particular LTI system with frequency response Nie^*^)^ the output of the system is found to be

y[n] = cos (517

jr\

^ Determine the values of me^^""^) for t 0, 1, 2, and 3.

3J5. Consider a continuous-time ideal lowpass fihei^ -S whose frequency response is

H = ],
Hij*^)

^ 100

> 0, lw| 100

T When the input to this filter is a signal x(t) with fundamental period = 7r/6 and
Fourier series ooefficients a** it is found that

For what values of k is it guaranteed that a^ = 0?

3,Hit Determitic the output of the filter shown in Figure P3.t6 for the following periodic

inputs:
(a) ;ciln] - (-1)" a>) = :c2lrtl l + sit^^n + |)

Xr*-- (C) xj[n] =

(^r "^ u[n-4k\

H{e^

I

_^ 2Tf

_t&F

-^ -;

f fi

Figure P3. 16

1^ ^

2l7 *£>

254

Four^r Series Reprasentalion of Periodic Signals

Chap. 3

3.17, Consider three continuous-time systems Sa^S^. and 5^ whose responses to a complex
exponential iitput e^^' st& specified as

^iSi
5k: S2 : e
J5/

te J^ cos<5r).

For each system, determine whether the given infortnatioii is sufficient to conclude that the system is definitely not LTl.
3.1^ Consider three disciete-time systems S\ , Sj* and S^ whose respective responses to a complex e?tponential input f^^^" ar^ specified as

^*n/2
5l

^ ^>7m¨^|^^

^*H/2 Si

^ji-rrnf2
J

53 ^'wna __^ 2^^^"""^.

For each syistem, detemune whether the given information is sufficient to conclude that the system is definitely not LTI.
3,19. Consider a causal LTI system implemented as the JfL circuit shown in Figure P3.19.
A current source produces an input current x{t), and the system output is considered
to be the current >(/) flowing through the inductor.

m

1H

Ml

Fl9Ui¨P3.19

(a) Find the diffei^ntial equation relating x{s) and y{ty (b) Determine di* frequency response of this system by considering the output of
= the system to inputs of the form jc(0 *?'*'.
<c) Determine the output yt/J if x{t) = oos(f),
3.20. Consider a causal LTI system implemented as the RLC circuit shown in Figure
P3.20. In this circuit, j(t) is the input voltage. TTie voltage y(t) across the capacitor is cunsidered tha system output

+

C=1F

m
- RguK P3.20

.

Chap. 3

Problems

255

<a) Find the differential equation relating x{t) and y{t}.

(b) Determine the ^equency response of this system by considering the output of

= the SiysteTTi to inputs of the form x(t)

^*^'

(c) Deteimine the output y{0 if Je(0 -- sinCrt^

BASfC PROBLEMS
A 3.21' ci)ntinu9us'time periodic signal x{f) is real valued and has a fundanbental petiod ^ r 8. The nonzero Fourier series coefficients for jc(/) arc specified as ill = È3*1 = j\a^ - a^^ = Z
Express x{t) in the form

Xit) = ^Ai^co^wkt + <t>k).

3,22. Determine the Fourier series representations for the following signals: (£) Eaeh j<c{0 illustrated in Figure P3.22(aHf)(b) x(t) periodic with period 2 and

< < ^ - x(t)

e ' for

1

f

1

^y\/\x\^y\y

-7 -6 -5 -4 -3 '2 -1

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 B 9 10 t

Figure P3.22

,

256

Fourier Serlfls RepresentaUofi o( P¨rtodic Signals

Gh^p. a

t -3 + -

\

-4

-2

r

1.

1 1 3A & 1

2

4

et

EL n IL
a -7 -¨

_IL

-tr tr -3 -2 -1

34 5 6

"hr^'r^rhfL

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1

12 3 4 5 6 7

^

(c) jc(rj periodic with period 4 and

Figure P3.22 Contifiii^

^4
3.23* In eath of tht following, we specify the Fourier seiicH coefficients of a continuous-
time signal that is periodic with period 4. Determine the signal xit)m each case.
(a) flt-|^.^*M^ othenvise

a,
l^
= (d) fl,
-i5Z

oiiierwise
fceven
*odd

3.24. Let

^ f J,

-^{0

- I 2

f,

a ^ f :S 1
I ^r ^2

be a periodic signal with fundamental period T = 2 and Fourier coefficients a^
(a) Determine the value of oo<b) Determine the Foiiirier series representation <if djc{t}idt. (c) Use the result of part (b) and the differentiation property of the continuous-time
Fourier series to help determine (he Fourier series coefficients of t(0^

Chap. 3

Problems

257

3.25. Consider ihe followitig three cootinuous-tinK: signals wilh a fuTKJamental period of
T - t/2:
t(f) = Cos(47r0,

(a) Etetermine the Fourier series coefficients of x{t). (b) Determine the Fourier series coefficients of y{r).
(c> Use the restiks of pan^ (a) amj (b), along with the muitipJicatJon property of the
continuous-time Fourier series, to determine the Fourier scries coefficients of zU) = xit)yU).
(d) Determine ^e Fourier series coefficients of2(^) through dinsct expansioti of ^r)
in (j-igonometric form, and compare your result with that of part <c). 3,2<i£ Let x(t) be a periodic signal whose Fourier series coefficients are
- ft ¨i - [\ m,)v^l'\WK otherwise'
Use Fourier series properties to answer the following questions:
(a> Is x{t) real?
(b) Is jc(t) even? (c> Is d x(t}/dt ^venl
A 3,27. discrete-tiine periodic S7gn^ xf/ij in real v^u?d and ha? a fundamentaJ period
A^ = 5. The nonzero Fourier series ooeftioients for jc[rt] are
= aa = 2,a2 ^'.2 = le^""^, a^ = d.^ = <-^^
Express xln] in the form

k=\

3,2S. Determine the Fourier series coefftcietiis for each of the foltowijig discrete-time

periodic signals. PloLthe magnitude and phase of each set of coefficients d^.

xM (a> Each

depicted in Figure P3.28(^Mc>

= (b) x[tt] sin(2irrt/3)cos(irrt/2>

(c) x[h] periodic with period 4 and

^ - xin] - 1 sin

for ^ n ^ 3

4

(d) xin] periodic with period 12 and

-- --^ = xl/t]

1

tth
sin

4

for O :^ ¨ :^ 11

2S8

Fourier Sen^s Representation of Periodic Signals

Chap. 3

111 imi
-14

X[Tll

iim :iiiii iiin iini ii

,,

,

,

-7

T

f4

2^ n

(a)

xlnl

iiii,,iin,.iiii, :mi

la

-12

-6

{bj

1111

1111
n

nil

ia

n

t

1

1

1

h

1

1

1 1

2' I
1
1 1

, 1

1

1

.

1

1

1

1

'

1

^rpmTM M 1 ,

1

1ñ 11

ñ ' ,

m*

^*

1" 1'

1

Fjgure P3.28

3*29£ In each gf the following, we specify the Fourier serits coefticiem^ nf d sigiial that isi periodic with period 3 Detamine the signal x[n\ in each case.

(a)¨,=.co,(^)+sin^^) (b)¨, = {^|"(t> Of^ k ^ 6 -7

(<:) ^t as in Figure P3.29(a)

<d> Oi as in Figure P3, 29(b)

^

111 HI mill
-8
ta]

15

fc

ak

Li^M. ll li .,.il lli i..i l lli,.,iJ

-e

s

16

k

{b}

Figure P3.29 3J0. Consider the following three discrete-vime signals with a fundamental period of 6:

x\n] = I - cosj-^n|,

jl y[ti] = sin -^rt +

= z[n]

.r[n]y[n].

Chap-3

ProblefTs

259

(a) Determine the Fourier series coefficients of jif[n], (h) Detemiirie the Fourier series ct>effie ienta of j[n]. (c) Use ihe rtaults at parts (a) and (b)^ along with the multiplication property of
the discrete-time Fourier series, todeteimine the Fourier series coefficienti: of
;[nj ^ .x[n]y[nl
(d) Efetermine the Fourier series coefficients of ^Ifl] through direct evaluation, and cortipaxe your result with that of pan (c).

3.3L Let

^ x[n]^

J.
0.

n^ 7

^ 8

^ rt

9

V be a periodic signal with fundamenial period ^ 1 and Fourier series coeffit; ients
ijf,. Also, Jet

x[n- - ,v[rtl

x[n] -

1 ].

fa) Show that ^[h] has a fundainental period of 10.
(b) Determine rhe Fourier series coefficients iyf girt]. <c) Using the Fourier series coeFticients of ^jnj and the First- Differenoe property
in Table ^.2, deterjninedir for jt ?^ 0.
3*31k Consider the signal Jt[n] depicted in Figure P332 This signal is periodic with period A^ = 4, The sign^iJ can be expressed in terms of a di*;crete-iinie Fpiirier series as

= y Mfi]

>jl(2J7/4h'r
CtfiL'

,1 Hh

i:p^..^2-n

2f

JJJJJ l l .l.l.l.l.' l l .l.

.

.

t" 1-b' \-^\y 1

16 n

Figure P3.3Z

A.s mentioned in the te^xt, one vay to determine the Fourier series coefficients is

= to treat eq. (P3.32-i) as a set of four line^a^ equations (for n

0. 1. 2,^) in four

unknowns (<Joj tJi, tf;, anda^).

(a) Write out these four equations exiplicitly, and solve them direo^^^ using any stan-

dard technique for solving four equatiwns in four unknowtis. (Be sure first tu

reduce the foregoing compJex exponentials to the simple'tt form ) (b) Check yotir answer by caJcuJating the a^ directly, using the discrete -time

Fourier series analysis equation

-jfi{2-jr.'4in ^i.

260

Fourier Seri?^ R^pT^sentatjon of PerLa<lJc Signals

Chap. 3

333. Consider a causal cantinuDuS'liine LTT svstem whose input xit) anul output yit) are related by the fo Hawing differential equation:

Find the Fourier series representation of the output y{t) for each of the following

inputs

(a) x<t) = cos2ir/

-- (b) xit)

sin47r/ -f cos(67rr 4 ttM)

3l34. Consider a continuous-time LTI s^^stem with impulse response

Find the Fourier series representation of the output y(t) far each of the following
inputs:
(a) x(t) - yi~: .^S{t-n) (b) J^it) = Z::^^i-iy'S(t - n)
(c) ^<0 is the periodic wave depicted in Figure P3.34.

A^
^ 1 n-3J-l2J-O1JllXL1 -C2LJI3 L-4Q t

Figure P3.14

3Ji5* Consider a continuous-time LTI system 5 whose frequency respcnse is

¨(/.-) =

i-l""''

[;; Otherwise

When the input to this system ]s a signal A(r) with fundamental penod T = 7r/7 and
Fourier series coefficients a^^ it is ft^und that the output y(t} is identical tu jt(f).
For what values ofk is it guaranteed that at ^ D?
3.36. Consider a causaJ discrete-time LTI system whose input x[n] and output y[n] are related by the following difference equation:

U y[n] - jjf"-

= '^I'll

Find the Fourier series representation of the output y[n] for each of the following
inputs;
(a> j([n] = sin(^¨> <b> ^fll - cos(|n) + 2cos(|/i)
3J7. Consider a discrete-time LTI system with impulse response

Chap. 3

Problems

26\

Find the Fourier series representation of the output y{n] for each of the fEjllowing
inputs:
(b) Jt[rt] is periodic with period 6 and

^^"^-JO, 7. = Ý2.Ý3

338* Consider a. discrete-time LTl system with impulse response

f 1,
h[n] = \-l,
[ 0,

^ :^ rt

2

-2^ n :^ -I.

otherwise

Given that the input to this system is

determine the Fourier series coefficienis of the output y[n].
3*39. Consider a discrete-titne LTl system S whase frequency response is

N Show that if the input x[n\ to this system has a period - 3, the outpui y[n] haij
only one nonzero Fourier series coefficient per penod.

A[>VANCED PROBLEMS

3*40. Let x{t) be a periodic .signal with fundamental period T and Fourier series coeffi-

cients Èik. Derive the Fourier series coefficients of each of the following signals in

tertns of at:

- + Mt + (a> jf(r Uy)

ro>

(b) Mt(0}

(c) ffi^{^(/>}

(c) x(3t - 1) [for this part, first determine the period of jc(3f - J )] 3,41. Suppose we are given the foJlowing information about a continuous-time periisdic
signal with period 3 and Fourier coefficients a^:

2* ak = a-k-
3. /_"oV(f>" = 1-

Determine x(t).

262

Fourier Series R&prese4itatran of Periodic Signals

CJ^sp, 3

3^2* Lei x^ty be a real-valued signal with fundamental period T and Fourier series coef-
ficients Ui;.
(a) Show that aj^ = al^ and oo must be real. (b) Show that if x{t} is even, then its Fourier series eoefflcieni^ must b¨ real and
even.
(c) Show that if x(0 is odd, then its Fourier series coefficients are imagiuaiy and
odd and Hi) -- 0.
4d) Show that the Fourier coefficients of the even part of jc<r) ar^ equal to (R^at](e) Show that the Fourier coefficients of the odd pan of -t(r) are equaJ to J&m{ak}.
A r 3A3. {a} continuous-time periodic signal j:(0 with period is said to be orff/ZwrTHO'njt
if. in its Fourier series representation

^ djt

for every ncn-iero evai integer ft,

(1) Show that if xit) is odd harnionic, then

jt(0 - -^i(t-+ ?^|).

(P3.43-2)

(ii) Show that if x{j) satisfies cq. (P3,43-2), then it is odd harmonic.
(h> Suppose that x{t) b an odd-harnvonic periodic signai v?ith period 2 such that
x(t) ' T for < f < L
Sketch x(t) and fitid its Fourier series coefficients. (c) Analogously, to an odd-harmonic signal, we could define an even-harmonic
signal a& a signal for which aic = for k odd in the icpresentation in cq. (P3,43-
1). Could 7 be the fundatnental period for such a signal? Explain your answer
T m (d) More gejierally; show thai is the fundament^] period of xii} eq. (P3.4i-1)
if one of two things happens: (1) Either a [ ora_| is nonzero;
or
(2) There are two integers k and I that have no common fectors and art; such
that both aji and aj are nonzero.
3h44- Suppose we are given die foElowiug infbnnation about a signal x{t)'

1. jc(Ojs a rcaJ signal
2. x{t) is periodic with period T = 6 and hai Fourier coefficient o>. 3. fli = OforJt= 0andjt>2.
4. jftf) = -x(t-3).

6, ai is a positive real numbor.
Show that jf(0 = A c<^s(Bf + C), and determine the values of the constants A, B,
aitdC

cr>ap. 3

Problems

263

3,45. Let xiO be a real periodic signal with Fourier series representation given in the
sine-cosine fomi of eq, (3,32); i^,,

2^[Bk = + x(t)

gj)

cos kfopt - Cj, sin kwatl

= k i

i?2A5^\)

(a) Hud Ebe eiponeniia] Fourier series representation of the even and odd parts of
M.t); that is, find the coefficients offt and ^k in tenns of the coefftcienis in eq.
(P3.45-1) so that

^ &^{xit)i =

ff^eJ^^

fr=-.oc

2 GtÈ{j(0} =

/3ts^^^^

*= -^

(b) What is the relationship between a^ ando!-* inpartta)? What is the relationship between ^j and ^-*7
(c) Suppose that the signals x<0 atid dt) shown inFigurc P3.45 have the sine-cosine
series representations

2^ ^-- -- xU) = au +

^ _, j- Bk

COS

/2ffftA
)-

<^t

. (27rkt\ sin/

I

t=i

_ ,,

/2fl'Jtr\

--i-- - Èt cos (

I

. /27rt;\'
/=^i sin r --y-

MH

\ KK K K h

-6 -3 -2

1

34

fl

7

9

t

2

-6

-3 -1

-a-

34

67

9

t

Fjgure P3.45

Zfr4

Fourier Series R^resentation of Periodic Signals

Chap. 3

Sketch the signal

^1 Bk + -Èi

cos/fl--ir=k--t

\

+

(lirkt
Fjsin

jk=l M-

3,46 In this problem, we derive two important properties of the continuous-time Fourier
series: the multipHcation property and Parseval's relationn Let xii) and y{s) both be continuous-time periodic signals ha\ing period To and with Fourier series representations given by

t=--:

* = -¨

{a)

Xz(t)

2(t) COS 20Trt,
^X wiieie i[t} ts as in Figure P3.22{ff

>a{t)
-3 Figure P3.46

Chap. 3

Problems

(a) Show that the Fourier series coefficients of the signal

265

arc given by the discrete coavglution

2^ ^t =

anbi:-,,.

(b) Use the result of part (a) to compute the Fourier series coefficients of the signals Xi (/>, X2(,t\ and x:iO) depicted ir> Figure P3,46.
(c) Suppose that y(t] in eq. (P3.46-1 ) ˋquaJs j;*(0 Express the i>t ie the eqtiatioti in
-- terms of ojt, and ijse the resuh of part (a> to prove Paisevals i^elatJoti for pericidic
signals that is.

r,
J
3w4T Consider the stgn^
xif) -- cos27rr.
Since xii) is periodic with a fmidamental period of 1 , it is also periodic with a period
M N of where is any positive integer. What are the Fourier series coecficients of jf(/)
if we regard it as a periodic signal with period 3?
N 3£4£. Let x\n\ be a periodic sequence with period and Fourier series representation

The Fourier series coefficients for each of the following signals can be cKpressed in
terras of a^ in eq. (P3.4&"1V Derive the expressions.
(a) xin - no] (b) x\n\ - x[n - 11
N (c) x[fi\ -- xln ^ yj (assume that is even)
(d) x[n] -^ x{n+ ^] Cassvune that JV is even; note that this signal is periodic with
period N/2}
(f> ( - 1 )'^x[n] (assume that.V is even)
N (g> <" l>"jc[i£3 (assume that is odd; aoie that this signal is perio^c wich period

3A9^ Let ^[n] be a periodic sequence with period iV and Fourier series representation k = <v>

266

Fourier Series Representation oif Periodic Signals

Chap. 3

N (a> Suppose that is *;ven and that x[ri\ in eq. (P3A9-1) satisfies

N

"+2 x\n\ = -X

for aJl n.

Show that Qk = for all even integer^; k. (h) Suppose That A^ is divisible by 4. Show that if

x[n] = --X

for all ft.

0^=0 then

for every value of jt that is a multiple of 4.

N (c) More generally, suppose that is divisible by an integer M. Show that if

(.v/^f>-]
r=

^^ =
""^'M

for all n.

= then tifr

for every value of jt that is a multiple of Af.

3,50, Suppose we are given the following information about a periodic .signal x[n] with
period 8 and Fourier coefficients a^:

3, 42rt+ 1] = (-l)^

Sketch one period of x[nl

3£51£ Let .Tc[n] be a periodic signal with period A^ ^ 8 and Fourier series coefficients

= dy

--aii-4' A signal

= with period A' 8 is getiemied. Denoting the Fourier series coefftcients of y[n] by
&jt, fin<i a function f[k] such that
N 3,52. jc[n] is a real periodic signal with period and complex Fourier series coefficients
Oi, Lei the Cartesian form for a be denoted by ;t
where i?jt and t^ are both real,
= (a) Show that a-^ aj. What is the relation between b^ and È1..^? What is the
relation between c^ and c-^?
N (h) Suppose that is even. Show that a^/^ is real.

1

1

Chap 3

PrahJems

267

<c) Show that x[n\ can also be expressed as a trigonomccric Fourier series of the

^ -- q - :[n]

2 Of) -H

Pt cos [

^^-- -- \

sin

A^

N

k= I

N if is odd or as

^ ^ + + Ji|/i]

(fffl ov/2(-l) J 3

6^co5|^N7^ ]- asm

N

N if is even,
(d) Show that if the polar form of ^^ is ^c-t-^**, then the Fourierseries representation
for ;i;[rtj can also be written as

N if is odd OT as

--N 2_ x[n\ = iiii^-i

>*jtcos[ ^^-- + 0^

= ;

i

ry/2>-

i-1
^ if is even.
{ej Suppose that y\n\ and zliJt as depicted in Figure P3.52, have the sine-cosine
series represent atiotis

x[n}

tt

rii 1, 1 ii I

li

' 11

,

,

14

^[nl 3
t2

II

II

TT

-7
IT

jr ui-V -u

figure P3.5Z

268

Fduriftr Series Repr¨¨¨ntation cf Periodic Signals

Chap. 3

Sketch the signal

3

flirkrt]

(lirkn
.

fr=i

3

/Itrkn] ^ . /27rtn\l

k=\

i

2^ ^^ --^ y[n] - ac- do +

rft cos (

1+ (/t - cOsin I

I

k=\

N 333, Let x[n] be a real pericxJic signal with period and Fourier coefficients a^.
(a) Show that if Af is even, at least two of the Fourier coefficient'? within one period
of djt afe real.
N (b) Show that if is odd, at least one of the Fourier coefficients within one penod
of a^ is real.
354, Consider the function

r=

ÝK Ý3M (a) Show [hat a[k] = jV for * = 0.

Ý2N,

,, . .

(b) Show that Èt[k] - whenever k is not an integer multiple of N. [Hint Use the

finite sumfoimula,)

(c) Repeat parts (a) and (b) if

N 3*55. Let jf[nj be a periodic signal with fundamental period and Fourier series coeffi-
cieEits ajc. In this problem, we derive die time-scaling property

^(mn^i I^

* Oh Ým. Ý2m,-
elsewhere

listed in l^ble 3.2.
(a) Show that j((m)[rt] has period of m^, <b> Show that if

= x[n]

+ v[f^) wfrt],

then

Chap. 3

Problems

269

= (c) Assuming that ;t[n]

er-'^''^^^^ for some integer Jtn, verify that

Xi^)M = i2;^J:-tA,^^A^J^c,,^^J^

m That is, one complex exponentia] in x[n] bocosne^ a linear combination of
complex exponentials in ^(m>[^J^ <d> Using the results of parts <a), (b), and (c), show that if x[n\ has the Fouiier
coefticients at,, then x^,,^[n] must have the Fourier coefficients -- fl^.
N 3.56. Let jc[nl be a periodic signal with period and Fourier coefficient* Ok
(a) Express the Fourier coefficients b^ of \x[ri\\^ in terms of a^. (b) If the coefficients a^. are real, is it guaranteed that the coefficients ht are also
real?
3.57. (a) Let
^I

and

be periodic signals. Show that
where

k=
JV I
i=n

(b) Generalize the result of part (a) by showing that

(c) Use the result of part (b) to find the Fourier series representation of the following signals, where x[n] is given by eq. (P3.57^1).
(i) 4^]cos(^) 00 4r£E:r_5[rt - rAT]

(iii) ^h]fe;r_5

N (assume that is divisible by 3)

id] Find the Fourier series representation for the signal J^[n]>[fll> where

270

FQLrisr Seri^ RQpresentaton of Periodic Signats

Chap. 3

and

r,

fU

^ \fi\

3

h periodic with period 12.
(c) Use th& result of part (bi to show that

and from this expressioQ, derive Parseval's relation for discrete-time periodic
signals.
3*58* L^t :)^{n\ and y\_n\ be periodic signals with common period N, and let

be their periodic convolution.
(a) Show (hat z\n\ is al^o periodic with period N.
(b) Verify that if ^jt> ijtt and ct are the Fourier coefficients of x\n\ y[¨], and z[ri]^ respectively, then

(c) Let and

= j:[rt]

sin

.. _ r 1.

^n< 3

be two signals that are periodic with period 8. Find the Fourier series repre^entation ibr die periodic convolution of these signals^ (d) Repeat part <c) for die following two periodic signals diat also have period 8:

[a

4 :È n ^ 7

V

^5?* (a) Suppose x[f\\ is a periodic signal with period N. Show that the Fourier senes
coefficients of the periodic signal

^ g{t)=

x[k\d{t-kT)

* = -¨

are periodic ivith period N.

Chap. 3

Problems

^'i

(b) Suppose ihat x{r) is a periodic signal with period 7 and Fourier series coetlicients fljt with period N. Show that there mvsi exist a periodic sequence ^[n]
such that

(c) Can a continuous periodic signal have periodic Fourier coefficients'?

3.60* Consider the following pairs of signals x[fi] and yln]. For each pair^ determine
whether there is a diBcrete-time LTI system for which y[n] is the output when the
corresponding x[n] is the input. If such a system exists, determine whether the system i& unique (i.e., whether there is nwne than one LTI system with the given inputoutput pair). Also, determine the frequency responf^e of an LTI system with the desired behavior. If nu such LTI system exists for a given JÈ[n]^ yln) pair, explain why.
(a) x[n] = ({"),y[n] = (f) (b) x[n] = {^"Mnly[n\ = (^ru[n]

(c> x[n\ - ({"MnlyM - 4"u[-nJ

(d> x[n] = e^^'^.yln] = le^"^

(e) x[n] = e^^^iiinl >[n] = le^^'^uln]

m x{n\ = j\y{7i\ - 2j\\ - j)

= (fi) ^[h] = costTTn/S).^!/!]

cos<7rn/3) + ^3 sin(7rrt/3)

(h) jc[fj] and y\[n\ ^sin Figure ?3 .60

(i) x[h\ and yiyn] as in Figure P3.60

¨jn -12

xn

MTi

Ti!

12

rn
2È ft

ññni.,,Tn...in...i Ti ...m...Tn...in...-

-1S

-9

-3

3

9

15

SI

rt

*¨! ! ! £*<***^ I ^******ll I

II

*

-9

9

Ifl

Figure P3.60
3.6L As we have seen+ the techniques of Fourier analysis are of value in exaitiining
continuous-time LTI systems because periodic complex exponentials are eigenfunc-
tions for LTI systems. In this problem, we wish to substantiate the following statement: Although some LTI systems may have additional ^gcnfuncrions, the complex
exponentials are the only signals that are eigenfuncdotis of every LTI system.

272

Four^r Senas Hepresantatkm of Periodic Signals

Chap 3

(a) What are the eigenfuncticms of the LTI system with unit impulse response

h{f) -- d{ty? What are the associated eigenvalues?

^ (b) Gotisiderthe LTI system with unit impulse response ii(t) = 5<i - T) Find a

s^nat Chat is not of

form t!^, but that is an eigenfu[K:tion of the system with

eigenvalue 1 Similarly, tind the eigcnfunctiops with eigenvalues 1/2 and 2 that

aie not complex exponentials. {Hint: You can ilnd impulse trains that meet these

requirements.)
(c) Cottsider a stable LTI system with impulse response h{t) that is real acid even. Show thai cos cut and sinoi^ are eigenfunclion^ ^f this system,
(d) Consider the LTI sysienn with impulse response A(0 - m(/>. Suppose that <^/) Ls
an eigenfunction of this system with eigenvalue A. Find the difTerential equation that ipif) must satisfy, and sofve the equation. This result, together with those
of parts (a) throu^ (c>, should prove the validity of the statemeEst made at the
beginning of the problem.

3.ti2. One technif]ue for building a dc power supply is to take an ac signal and full-wave

we rectify it, 'Hiat is,

put the ac signal x{t) thiough a Èy$tei3i that produces y{ty =

\x(t)\ as its output.
4fl) Sketch the input and output waveforms if x(t) = cos t. What are the fundamen -

tal periods of the input and output?
(b) If Jt<f) = cosf, determine the coefficients of the Fourier series for the output

(c) What is the amplitude of the dc component of the input signal? What is the
ampiitude of the dc component of the output signal?
3.63. Suppose that a continuaus-time periodic signat is the input to an LTI system. The signal has a Fourier series representation

2! j(rt =

*^'"^

wherea isareal nun^jerbet^^eenOand Ipandthefrequency response of the system
is

W How targe must be in order for the output of the system to have at least 9% of
the average energy per period of x(i)?
X64* As we have seen in this chapter, the concept of an eigenfunctioo is an extremely important tool in the study of LTI systems. The same can be said for linear- but time-
varying, systems. Specifically, consider such a system with input x(t) and output >(f ). "We say that a signal <^r) is an eigenfunction of the system if

-^ ti>U}

Xti>U).

= That is, if xit)

^(f), then y(t) = A^f). where the complex constant A is called

the eigenvalue associated with cK'V

Cftap 3

Probleffis

273

(a> Suppose that we can represent the it^put j:(/) to our system as a lineai" combina-
tion of tigenfunctions <^>(/), each of which has 3 corresponding ejgenvaJue A^;
Ehai is,

jL=-^
Express the output v(^) of the system in terms of {q}. {<t>k{t)]t and ^Ajt}(b) Consider the system characterized by tbe differential equation

Is (his system linear? Is it time invariant?
(c) Show that tbe functions
are eigenfunctions of the system in part <b). For eacb <^tU). determine the corresponding eigenvalue At. (d> Determine the output of the system if

EXTENSfON PROBLEMS

3.65, Two functions uU) and v{/) are said to be orthogonal over the interval (a,b} if

t
¨(0v* {t}dt = a
I

(P3.65-I)

If, iu addition.

- = \u(i)\-dt

1

|H(0|^^r,

A ihe functions are said to be normatizied sxid h&nce are called orthoinyrmal. sel of
funclions \fkk{^i\ i^ called an orthogonal (orthanormai) set if each pair of functions in the set is orthogonal (orthonormal). (a) Consider the pairs of signals nit) and vit) depicted in Figure P3.55. Determine
whether each pair ift orthogonal over the interval (0. 4>. (b) Are the functions sinm<tfo' and sinmtjor orthtJgonal over the interval (0, T),
T where - 2Tr/tti|>? Are they also orthonormal?
(c) Repeat part (b) for the functions i^rt,(r) and iii,,{r\ where
-- 4£i(0 = ^[cost^o' + sin^wur].

2?4 oW

Fourier Se^es T^Qpresemtation of Periodic Signaj?

Chap. 3

vtt)

2a

4

t

-1

la)
&pon^ritiaI& witti
lime constant = 1
uW

13

34

ExponentiaJs ^itti
tima coristart = i

-3 ^

2 34

t

(b)

sin[Trf2J

Sir(^+^)

u(t)

(cj v(t)

12

4

t

1a

4

I

Figure P3.65
^d) Show that the functions ^^^(0 ^ fJ^'^o* ^re orthogojia] over any intervaJ of
length T ^ Inhi^, Are they onhononna]?
<e> Let j:(0 be an ^bitrary signal, and lei x^,{t) aiid j^ (f) be, respectively, the odd and even parts gT x(t). Sh<jw that jr,,<?> and x^{t} are orthogonal over the interval (-7*, r) for any T.

Chap. 3

Problems

275

(f) Show that if {<^^(r)} is a set of oitKogonal signals over the interval {a, h), then
the set{(l/v'^t)(^^(OK where

is rrrthonCEittaL.
ig} Let {<ftiU)] be a set of onhotiormAl signals orr the intervaJ (^h h)^ and consrder a sigral wf Ihefomi

i
where the ai arc complex constants. Show that

I

s (h) Suppo&e that ^|(rX ._, ^;^r(/) are noiizeio only in the time interval

f

r^ T and that ihey are orthonormal over this time interval. Let L, denote the

LTI system with impulse response

n hi\t) ^ <^,(r -

(P3.65^2)

Show that if ^^(0 is applied to diis system, then the output at time T is 1 if i = J and if / ?^ j. The system with impulse response given by eq. {P3,65-2) was referred to in Problenis 2,66 and 2.67 as the matched fitter for the signal

3-66. Hie purpose of this problein is to show that the representation of an arbitrary pe-

riodic signal by a Pourier series oi, more generally, as a linear combination of any

set of orthogtinaJ functions is computatiotially efficient and in fact very useful for

obtaining good appraximations of signals.'^

= Ý L Ý2 Specifically, let {c^j(i)}, i

0,

be a set of onhonomial functions

on the interval o s ; ^ /?, and let xU) t>e a given signal. Consider the follow-
^ ing approximation of xit) over the interval a :^ t b\

X i,,(t) =

¯r*^KrX

(P3.6^1)

Here, the ff, are <in general, complex) constants. To measure the deviation between xit) and the series approximation Xf^{t), we consider the error ^n^^) deiined as

e^(f) = JiU) - j^(0.

(P3.66^2)

-- A reasonable and widely used criterion for measuring the quality of the approxima-
tion is the energy in the error signal over the interval of interest that is, the integral

Sec Ptublem 3 &S fnr (he dcKrtitiuns of ortKogon^i and urthonunrKtl functirms

276

Fourier Series Rep<e$entatlDn ot Panodic Signa^^

Cha^. 3

^ ^ of the square of the magnitude of ihe error over the inLerval a t b:

(o> Show thai E is miniTiiized by chwsmg

-r x{i)^]{t)dt^

(P3 66^4)

[Hmt: Us<: eqs. (P3.66-1 )-(P^'66-3) to express Èin tetms of Ci£ t^,(fX a&d xiiy

+ ^d Then express ffj in rectangular coordinates as a, ^ b^ jc?,,

show that the

----0 and -^ = OJ - 0, Ý1, Ý2,,..,A^
are satisfied by the ¨j as given by eq. (P3.66-4).] (b) Hoiv does the result of part (a) change if

and the {<^j(0} are o^ogcmal btit not oithonormal?
(c) Let <frn(f) = e^"""\ and choose any interval of length Tu = ^W^o- Show that È the iij that minimize are ais given in eq. (3.50).

(d) The sec of Watsh fi4ni::tion$ is an often -used set of orthonormal functions ^ (See

Prohlem 2 66*) The set of five Walsh functions, <^(f), <Ai(0£ -£ ^4(0£ is iUus-
m trated Figuire P3.66^ where we have scaled tinie so that the *^i(f) are nonzero

^ ^ and orthonorma] over the interval

f

1. Let x(t} -- sin J^^ Find the ap-

proximation of x{t) of the form

such that

1 |x(/)-i(/)|V^

is minimized,

(e) Show that x^it) in eq. (P3.6^1) and ewit) in eq- iP3.66-2) are orthogonal if

the fli are chosen as in eq. (P3.66-4).

The results of parts (a) and (b) are extremely important in that they show

^ that each coefficient ti, is independent of all the other a/%^ i

j Thus* if

we add more terms to the *ppni3timation [e.g., if we compute the approxi--

matron Jfv y i (01, the coefficients of 4>JtX i = ],.,,, A', that were previously
determiried wtll not change. In contrast to this, consider another type of se-

Chap. 3

Problems
W

277

(a)

1

1

t

1
-1
1
-1 -
1

(b)

1

t

{c}

(tf)

^

X

n

1

t

{el

Figure P3.6fr

lies expansion! the polynomial Taylor series. The infinite Taylor series for e^

= is e'

\ + t + t^fl\ + . .., but as w& shall shaw, when we consider a. finite

polynomial series and the error criterion of eq. (P3 .66--3), we get a very different

result-

= Specifically, let ^(r) " \,^\(t) = f. <^(f) *^, and so on.

^ (0 Are the i^r(f) orthogonal over the interval

t ^ 11

278

Fourier Serfos Hepresentatlon of Periodic Signals

Chap. 3

^ ^ (g) Consideran approximation of j:(0 = ^ over the mtervai

r 3ofthefonn

Fiiid the value of an that minimizes ttie enei^ in the efior signal &ver the in-

terva],

We (h)

now wish to approximate e* by a Taylor series using two lerms--i.e.,

[ E ^1 (0 = fln + fl] f- Find the optimum values for oq and . [^iru." Compute in

term$ of <i(] and a\, and then so We the simultaneous equations

-- -- - - Q and - = 0,

Note ih^t your ansvjcr for ao has changed from lis value in part (g), where there

was nly one term in the series. Further, as you increase the nuniber of teims in

We the series, that coefficient and all others will continue to change.

can thus

see the advantage to be gained in expanding i function using orthogonal tenns, J

3-67 As we discussed in the tej^t, the origiJis of Fourier analysis can be found in problems

of Tnathematical piiysies. In particular, the work of Fourier 'was motivated by his

investigation of heal diffusion. In this problem, we illustrate how the Fourier series
enter into the investigate on. ^^

Consider the problem of determining the temperature at a given depth beneatii
the surface of the e^rth as a function of time, where we assume thai the temperature at the surface is a |^ven fuactitjn ftf ame T{i) that is periodic wjlh period 1 . (The

unit of time is one year.) Let T(x. t) denote the temperature at a depth j below the

surface at time t. This futKtion ot¨y^ the heat diffusion equation

with auxiliary condition

rcao = T{t\

(P3.67^2>

> Here, k is the heal diffusion constant for the earth {k 0), Suppose that we expand
T{i) in a Fourier series:

2 T[S) =

a^^^'*^*'.

(P3,67-^3)

We Similarly, let us expand T{x. t) at any given depth i in a Fouriei series in t.
obtain

^ T{xj) =

i£,(:c)È^"^^

(P3,67-4)

where the Fourier coefficients bAx) depend upon the depth x.

'^The problem has been idapted ftum A. SommeFfeld. Partiai Diffsrvntial E^bttiotis tn Physics tKtw Vorki Academic Pitss, 1949). pp 6S--71.

Chap. 3

Problems

279

(a) Use eqs- (P3,67-l)-(P3.67-4) to $bow thai .E£,,(jt) satisfies the differentia] equa-
tion

with auxiUaty c(>ndition

b,,{0) =^ Cfl,

(P3.67^5b)

Sinoe eq. (P3.67-5a) is a second'^stdcr ¨quati<m, we Tieed a second amiliary

We condition.

argue on physical grounds that, far below the earth's surface* the

variationf in temperature due to surface fluctuations should disappear. That is^

lim T(x, t) - aconstanL

{P3.67-5c)

(b) Show that tha solution of cqs. (P3.67-5) is

2irW(l- jWtL n :^0
(c> Thus* the temperature oscillatiDns at depth x are damped and phase-shifted versions of the temperature oscillations at the sur^oe. lb see this more clearly,
let
= Tit) oo + ^1 ^in 27rr
(so that flo repi^setits the meam yearly temperature). Sketch T(r) and T{x, t) over
a one -year period for

% - Oii and tfi - L Note that at this depth not only are the temperature os-
cillations significantly damped, but the phase shift is such that it is warmest in
winter and coldest in summer. This is exactly the teasoth why vegetable cellars
are constructed!
3.68* Consider the closed contour shown in Figure P3.68. As illustrated, we can view this
curve as being traced out by the tip of a rotating vector of varying length. Let t{B)
denote the len^ Df the vector as a fuaction of the angle B. Then r{6) is periodic in
with period l-n and thus has a Fourier series reprcsMiiation. Lei {a^) denote the Fourier coeffident* ^i rifi).
<a> Consider now the projection x{B) of the vector ri9) onto the j-axis, a$ indicated in the figure. Detamine the Fourier coefficients for jc(d> in terms of the o/s.
(b> Consider the sequenoe of coefficients
Sketch the figure in the plane that coiresponds to this set of coefficients.

280

Fourier Series Fepresentation of Periodic Signate

Chap. 3

Figure P3.68

^c) Repeat pan (b) with
bk = akS[k].
(d) Sketch Agates in the plane &uch that r{9) h nor constant, but does have each of
the foElowmg properties:
(i) r(0) is even.
(ii) The fundamentaT period of ri9) is tt. (iii) The fundamental period of r(ff) is ir/2.
we 3.65^, In this problem, consider the discrtte-riitie counterpart of the concepts introduced
in Problems 3.65 and 3,66. In analogy with the continuous-time case, two discrete-
time signals t^kM and <^,,[n] are said to be orthogonal over the intcnal (M- ^i>
if

k=m
m # ft

(P3,69-l>

If the value of the constant* A^ and A,, arc both 1, tben the aignais are said to l^e
oftho/jormal. (a) Consider the signals
^kl"} = Sift -f^lk = 0,ÝJ, =tZ..., ÝN.
Show that these signals are orthononnal over the interval {-N, N)r
(b) Shew' that the signals

- ^i[¨] = ^'''^"^'^^^".k

0,1,,.., A^- 1.

are orthogonal over any interval of length JV.
(c) Show that if

x[n] = ^af4ti[nl
j=i

Chap. 3

Probleitis

where the 4>i [¨] are orthogona] over the integral {^i . A^z)^ then

281

= (d) Let <^j[/tJ, i

0^

1,

..

Af . ,

,

be

a set

of orthogonal

functions

over the

interva)

(/Vj , ^-2), and let x[n] be a given signal. Suppow that we wish to approximate

x[n\ as a linear combinatloD of the (^[[n]; that is,

M

where thc^; are constant coefFicienc$. Let
- È[n] = x\n] *lrt], and show that if we wish to minimize

then the a; are given by

A 1

2 = ^,

-T-

4¨J^?W-

(P3,69-2)

E [Hint: As jn Problem 3.66, express in terras of Hi, ^[n], A;, and x[n]^ wnce = ij; (>, + yc^, and show that the equations

SE
-r^

=

^

,
and

&E
-:^

-^

are satisfied by the a^ given by eq, (P3,69-2). Note that applying this result wh¨i the (^,tnl are as in part (b) yields eq. (3.95) for ff^.]
(e) Apply the result nf part (d) when the ^[til are as in part (a> to determine the
coefficientt; ti, in terms of x{n].
3.70. (a) In this problem, we consider the definition of the two-dimensional Fourier se-
ries for periodic signaJs with two independent variables. Specifically^ consider
a signal xi^], ^2) that satislie& the equation
xitxJj) = x{ti +Ti.t2^T2X forallf:,/3.
This signal is periodic with period 7*] in the ^1 direction and with period Jj in the f: direction. Such a signal has a series representation of tt^ form

^ ^^i>'^)- 21

a, "^^"^''^^'^'^^

n^ -^ m^

i

Z8Z

Fouriar Seriss Repi^esentatlon of Periodic Signate

Chftp. 3

where
Qji = Itt/Ti. W3 = 2'itJT2.
Find an expression for<a,,,, in temis of x{ti^ t^).
(b) Detemunt the Fourier series coefficienrs a^nn for the foUowing signals;
(i) cos{2Trf| +2^2) (ii) the Signal iOustrated in Figure P3.70
^i,y = 1 m shaded areas o^h:!!
aSsawhere

Figure P3.70 3.71. Consider the mechaMcAl systeni shown in Figure P3.71. The differendal equation
relating velocity vit) and the input force /(f) is given hy
BviO + K lvO)dt = fin
vffl
-- m Figure P3.71

Chap, 3

FYoblems

283

(a) Assuming that the output is fiij)^ the compressive forpe acting on the apdug,

v^iiCe the differendat equation it:la(iag /^(r) and f{t). Obtain the frequency re-

Siponse of the system, and argue that jk approuiuates thiat of a lowpass filter.

(b) Assuming that the output is fait\ (be compressive foroe acting on the dash-

^(0 pot, write the difFereottal equation relating

and fit)

Obtain the ftvquency

r^pon^ t>f the ^y^lem, and aigue than it Bppiroxiniaie& that of a h]ghpa$s filter.

-

4
The continuous-time fourier
transform

-- i

i.

- ñ/'

'

'

\
J-

^</ ^^ f m

^\ * r

^

4.0 jmthoduction

za4

In Chapter 3£ we developed a representation of periodic signaU a* linear combinations of

We complex exponentiaJs.

also saw bow this Tepresentation can be used in describing the

efTect of LTI systems on signals^

In this and the following chapter, we extend these concepts to apply to signals that are not periodic. As we wilt see^ a rather large class of signals, including all signals with finite

ener^, can also be rtpiesented through a linear combination of complex exponentiais.

Whereas for periodic signals the complex expot^ential building blocks are baimonically

related, for aperiodic signals they are inlinitesimally close in frequency, and the represen-

tation in temis of a linear combinaiion takes (he form of ao integral rather than a ¨um. l^e

resulting spectmtn of coefficients in this represencaiiDn is called the Fourier transfonn, and

the sjinthesis integral itself* which uses these coefficienis to re|Kesent the signal as a linear

combination of complex exponentials, is called the inverse Fourier transfomiH

The development of this representation for aperlfKlic signals in continuous time is
one oF Fourier *s most important contiibucions, and our development of the Fourier trans-

form follows very closely tbe approach he used in his original work. In particular^ Fourier

reasoned that an aperiodic signal can be viewed as a periodic signal with an infinite period. More precisely^ in the Fourier series representation of a periodic signa], as the period

increases the fundamental frequency decreases and the harmonically lelated components

become closer in frequency. As the period becomes infinite, the frequency components

form a continuum and the Fourier series sum becomes an integral. In the next section we develop the Founer series representation for continuous-time aperiodic signals, and
in the sections that follow we build on this foundarioti as we explore many of the important

.

Sfic. 4.1

^^ Representation of Aperiodk; ^^g'^l^:

Continuous-Time Fourier Transform

285

properties of the continuous-ttme Fourier transform that form the foundation of freqoency-
domaln methods for continuous-time signds and systems. In Chapter S, we parallel this
development for discrete-ttme signaJs.

4. 1 RPRESENTAT)ON CNF APERIODIC SIGNALS:
THE CONTTNUOUS-TIME FOURIER TRANSFORM
4. 1 . f Development of the Fourier Tl'ansforni Repnesentatfort of an Aperiodic SIgnaJ
To gain some insight intc the nature of the Fouiio' transform representation^ we begin by revisitmg the Founer secies representation for the continuous-time periodic square wave examined in Example 3,5. Specifically, over otie period^

T/2

and periodically repeats with period T, as shown in Figure 4. 1 A& determined in Example 3,5¨ the Fourier series coefficients aj, for this square wave
are

teq. (3.44)]

at - IsmJjkbtQTi)

i^h

where cjq = l^fT. In Figure 3.7, bar graphs of these coefficients were shown for a fixed
value of Ti and several different values of T.
An alternative way of tnter][H%ting eq. (4,1) is as samples of an envelope function,
specifically.

Tak = 2smtoTi
<f> ft^-JtftJ(^

(4.2>

l^at IS, with cti thought of a$ a continuous variable, the function (2 sin <j>T\ )/co represents the envelope of Tetj^^ and iho coefficients a^ are simply equally spaced samples of this
envelope. Also> for fixed 7| , the envelope of ria* is independent of T. In Figure 4.2, we
again show the Fourier series coefficients for the penodic square wave* but this time as samples of the envelope of Ta^^ as specified in eq. (4,2). From the figure* we itee that as

xffl

1

2T

-T

X -T 1

Ti

1

2

2

I
2T

Rgure 4.1 A continuoos-Ume periodic square wive.

2B6

The Coirtinuous-Time Fouher Transform

Chap. 4

Figure 4.2 The Fourier series co-

efficients and their envelo;>e br the

periodic square wave in Figure 4.1 for

several values trf T (with 7\ fixed),

= (a) T

4Ti; (b) T = ST,: (c) T -

T increases, or equivalency, a$ the fundamental frequency tua = 2irfT decreases , the envelope i$ sampled with a closer and closer spacing. As T becomes arbitrarily lar^e,

the odigina] periodic square wave appro^hes a rectangular pulse (i.e., all that remains in

the time domain is an aperiodic signal corresponding to or*c period of the square wave).

Also^ the Fourier series coefficieota^ multiplied by r> become more and more closely

spaced samples of the envelope, so that in some sense (which we will specify shortly)

7 -- the set of Fourier series coefficients approaches the envelope fimction as

"^ ¨.

This example illustrates the basic idea behind Fouricr^s devcloprnent of a represen-

tation for aperiodic signals. SpcciAcally, we ttiink of an aperiodic signal 9$ the limit cf a

periodic signal as the period becomes artritrajily large^ and we examine the limiting be-

tiavior of the Fourier series representation for this signal. In particular^ consider a signal

= x{f) that is of finite duration. That is, for some mimber T\^ xit)

> if [t|

7"^^ as illus-

trated in Figure 4.3(a). Fiom this aperiodic signal^ we can construct a periodic signal 1(0

fbr which M.t) is one period, as indicated in Figure 4.3(b), As wc choose die period 7 to

T ^ be larger, i(f) is identical to xif) over a longer interval, and as

*, xit) is equal to

xit) for any finite value of t.
Let us now examine the effect of this on the Fourier series representation of xit).

Rewriting eqs. (3.3fi) and (3,39) here for convenience, with the integral it> eq. (3 39)

¨

i

Sbc. 4.1

Represemailon g1 Aperiodic Stgnals: The ConWnuPUS-TlmB Fourier Transtomn
m

Qbi

287

ñ r^-1
-ÈT

r^--1
-T

m
rS-.

r-- .

r^--
ÈT

Figure 4.3 (A) ApenDdic slgrtal Jr(0; (b) periodic signal x[0. constructed to be equai to x(0 over one perk>d.
carried out over the interval -T/2 ^ r ^ 7^^ we have

(43)

^ J -T/2

= = < where tuQ

Iw/T. Since JE(0

jc(f ) for lr|

r/2, and also, since x(t) -

interval^ cq. (4.4) can be rewritten as

Tfl / J -Tfl

-}^f}i.

J J--

(4.4) outside this

Therefore, defining the envelope X{}tf>) of Ta^ as

(4.5)

we have, for the coefficients ak. fli = :=Jf(;AwoX
Cotnbining eqs. (4.6) and (4.3), we can express x{i) in terms oi Xijto) us

(4,6)

or equivalently, since 27r/r - ti>D,
Z ^<^> " ZtT;T; * = -" ^(;i^o)*^*^"o^

(47)

)

28a

The ContihuousTime Fourief Trat^form

Chafi. 4

As r --> *. x{t) approaches x(tX and consequently, in the limit eq. (4.7) becomes a rep-

^ rcserjtatioti of ^(f). Furthermore, ftio

as T -+ ¨, and the right-hand side of eq, {4.7)

passes tt> an integraJ. This can be seen by ccnsjdering the graphical inteipFctation of the

equation, iHuBtrated in Figure 4.4. Each term in the summation on the light-hand^de is

h the ^ea of a rectangle of height X{j kia(])e^^¯' and svidth n^o (Here^ t regarded ais fi xed, As lOo --* 0, the summation converges to the integral of Xijii>)e^"'^ TTierefore, u^ing
the fact that x{0 --* x(t) asT -+ <£, we see that eqs, (4.7) and (4.5) respectively become

and

I ^O'w)

x(t)e^^^'d(.

(4.8) (4,9)

Xij-aJeJ"'

Area ^ XlihiooJe^^' cd^

^^^IHOg

koip

Figure 4.4
Of eq. (4.7).

Graphicil inteipfetatkon

Equations (4.8) and (4,9)arereferred to as the Fowrjer/r^jri^^TTM pat/; with the func-
tion X(ja>} referred to as the Fourier Transform or Founer mtej^ral of Ji(t) and eq. (4.8) as the inverse Fourier traraform equation. The synthesis equation (4.S) plays a role for
aperiodic signals simitar to that of eq. (3 .33) for periodic Signals, since both represent a signal as a linear combination of complex exponentials. For periottic signals, these com-
plex exponentials have amplitudes (at), as gi\on by eq. (339), and occur at a discrete set
of harmonlLally related frequencies kttiQ, k ~ 0, Ý1,Ý2..,, For aperiodic signals, the
complex esponertlials occur at a continuum of frequencies ami, according to die synthesis equation (4.S), have "amplitude" Xij(o}idti)/27r). In analogy with the termmology used for the Fourier series coefticicrtts of a periodic signal* the transform X( ju>) of an aperiodic signal x(t) IS commonly referred to as the spectrum of jr(0> as jt provides us with the information needed for describing xit) as a. linear combination (specifically, an integral) of
sitius<^idal signals at different frequencies.
Based on the above deveLopmetit, or equivalently on a comparison of eq, <4,9) and
eq, (3,39), we also note that the Fourier coefficients a^ of a periodic signal jc(t) can he
expres,^d in terms of equally spaced samples of the Fourier transform of one period of ^(0^
Specifically, suppose that xfO is a periodic signal with period T and Fourier coefficients

Sec, 4,1

Representation ol Aperiodic Signals: The Continuous-Time Fourier Transform

289

^ -- fit- L^t xir) be a finite-duratLon signal that is equal to x(t} over exactly one period^--say*
for 5 :^'t 5 + Tfor some value of j and that is zero otherwise. Ttten, since eq. (339)
allows us to compute (he Fourier ooefficients of jÈ(r) by integrating over any period, we can write

Since xiO is zero outside the range j :^ ? :^ j + T we can equivatently write

Comparing with eq. (4.9) we coEiclude that

(4 JO)

where X(Jif>) \& the Fourier transform of x{t}. Equation 4. \0 states that the Fourier coefficients of ^/> are proportional (o samples of the Fourier transfonn of one period of x{t). This fact^ which is often of use in practice, i& examined fuitber in Problem 437.

4. 1 -2 Convergence of Fourfer Tt'ansfdrms
Although the argument we used in deriving the Fourier transform pair assumed that xii)
was of orbitmry but finite duration, eq&. (4.8) and (4.9) remain valid for an ej^trcmely broad
class of signals of infinite duration. In fact, our derivation of cbe Fourier transform suggests
that a set of conditions like those required for the convergence of Fourier s^es should also apply here, and indeed, that can be shown to be the case*f Specifically, consider -Y(^cu)
evaluated according.to eq. (4.9), and let i(r) denote the signal obtained by using X{J<if) in the right-hand side of eq. (4.S). That is.

^1 ^0 =

X{jia)e^^'dt^.

What we would like toicnow is when eq. (4.8) is vahd [i.e., when is 5t{{) a valid represen-
tation of the original signal Jf(r)?]. If x{t) has finite energy, IhC*, if it is square integrable,
so that

|j:(Op^f <£.

(4.11)

then we are guaranteed that X{j<a) is finite [i.e.. eq. (4.9) converges] and that, with e{t) denoting the error between 5t{i) and x{t} [i,e., e{t) = - Jt{t) Jf(0]i

'For a maChemiticalLy tigoctms ducussLon of the Fmrier ttansform and its properties sod pphcMtitmi,

see R. Bracewe]], TJw Foutiet Transfonn and Its AppUoQtktns, 2nd ed, <Ncw Ywk: McGtaw-HiU Book Com-

piny, 1986); A. Papoulis^ Thf Faurwr tntegrai and Its Appiicatians (New Ycut; McCnw-HitL Book Compdny,

1987)iE C-Tivhnaxsh. Ihtrodtictionioihe Theory efFourUr Integral iOxtoTd'.C^^
the booltby Dyn and McKcHniEferenced in fboUiote2 of Chapter 1

L94S);uh]

290

The Continuous-Timt Fourier Transform

Chap, 4

4x
|e(0|Vr = 0. I

(4.12)

U Equations (4,11) and (4J 2) are the aperiodic counterparts of eqs. (3.5 and (3.54) for
peritidic signals. Thus, in a manner similar to that for periodic signals, tf x(f) has finite
energy, then, although xit) and ite Fourier representation i(r) may differ significantly at
individual vaJues of t, there is no energy in their difference.
^ Just with periodic signals, there is an alternative set of conditions which are suffi-
cient to ensure that i(0 is equal to xit) for any f except ata discontinuity, where it is equal to the average of the values on either side of the discontinuity. These conditions, again
referred to as the Dirichlet conditions, require that:

1. xit) be absolutely integrable; tiiat is,

< \jiif)\dt

oc.

(4,13)

2. M*} ^a^e a finite number of maxima and uunima within any finite interval. 3. Mi) have a finite number of discontinuities within any finite interval. Futtiermore,
each of these discontinuities must be finite.
Therefore, ahsoluiety mtegrable ^i^nals that are continuous or that have a finite number of discontinuities have Fourier trartsforms.
Although the two alternative sets of conditions that we have given are sufficient to guarantee that a signal has a Fourier transform, we will see in the next section that peri-
odic $igna]s, which are neither absolutety integrable nor square integrable over an infinite interval, can be considered to have Fourier transforms if impulse functions are permitted in the transform. This has the advantage that the Fourier series and Fourier transform can
he incorporated into a common frameworlt, which we will find to be very t:onvenient in
subsequent chapters. Before examining the point farther in Section 4.2, however, let us consider several examples of the Fourier transform.

4.K1 ExarppJes of Continuous-Time Fourier IV-ansforins

Example 4,1
Consider t^ signat
Ffosn eq. (4.9>,

j(0 = e ""uO) a > 0,

That is,

Xijoi) =

^-, fl>0.

Sac. 4.1

Representation of Apenodic Signals: ThÈ Cor^tinuou&'Time FCHjrier Transform

291

^ Since this Fourier transform is complex v^ued, to plot it a function of w. we e^tprts^
X{jci>) in terms of its magnitude and phase:

-=2 = \X(,jot)\

<XUoi} = -tan-^f-V

h Each of these coijiponctJls sketched in Figure 4,5.
hTote that if a is cotnplc^t lalher than iteal, then xiO is absolutely integrable as Long
> as<H^f2} 0. aiKl in this (^ase the preceding calculation yields the same form for a:(;cli).
That is.
-- -- X{m) = > = , (Re{d} 0.

m

= > Figure 4.5 Fourier trar^ormjjf the signal x{t)

e'^'tfitl a 0. consid-

ered in E)c3mpie4.1.

Example 4.2
Let

= x(n

tf "*".

4t>0,

^

292

TTie Continuous-Tim¨ Fourier Transfom

Chap 4

This signal i* sketched in Figure 4.5. The Fourier transform of the signeil is

Xijo) =

-h^ e"^^e-^'dt f^ e-^'dl + e-^e-^'dt

1
a -- jDt

1
n + /oi

In this case X.{jm) is real, and it is illustrated in Figure 4.7,

Figure *.* Signal y(f) = e"*^ erf Example 4.2

Ftgurv 4.? Fourier transfornn of lh¨ sfgnal cODSidered in Example 4.2 and
depicted in Figure 4.6.

Exampre 4.3
Now let us determine Che Founer transform of ttic unit impulse
xrO = 5a>

(4.14)

Substituting into e^. (4.?) yields

X{j*a) = [ ^iOe-^^'dt = 1.
J--

{4,15}

That is£ the unit impulse has a Fourier trcmaform codsistiug of equal contri^tjonj dt alt
frequencies.

Sec. 4.1

Representation of Aperiodic Signals: The Continuous-Time Fourier Transform

2^3

Example 4.4
Consider the rectangular pulse signal

^^ jo, kl>ri'

(4.16)

as shown in Figure 4.8(a), Applying eq. (4.9). we find that ihe Fourier transform of this
si gnu] IS

^^

r

-

5SILnci>7

(417)

as sketched in Figure 4,8fb).
x(t)

(a)

Fi^urt 4. a {a) The rectanguJar pul$e sigtial of Example 44 and (b) its
Fcujrier transform.

As we discussed at tht l>eÈinning of tlii <. section, the signal given by eq. (4,16) can be

ttioughtof as the limiting form ofa periodic square wave as the period becomes arbitrarily

large. Therefore, wc might expect that the convergence of the synthesis equation for this

signal would behave in a manner similar to that observed in Example 3,5 for the square

wave .

This

is,

in

fact,

the

case ,

Spcci ficaJly ,

consider

the

inverse

Fourier

transform

for the

rectangular pulse signal:

JE(0_-

1

f^%sis:iiiwTi
e^^'rfw.

(it

Then£ since xU) is square integrable,

294

The CcHTtinuou^'Tlme Fcurier Tr^nsfom

Chap. 4

\xio -xufdt = a
f

= Furthennare^ becau^ x{i} satisfies the DirichJet conditions, Jt(0 xU)^ except at the

^ points of discontimiity, t

*T\^ where Jt{t) converges to 1/2, whicti is the average of

the values of xit) on both sides of the discontinuity, hi additioD* the conveigence of x{t)
to jt{t) exhibits the Gibhs phenomenon, much as wa$ illustrated for the periodic square wave in Figure 3.9, Specifically, in analogy with the finite Fourier series approximation,

eq. (3.47)¨ consider the following integral over a hnite-length interval of ^equencies:

,smatT\
e^'^'do^. at

As H^ -* '", this signal converges to x(t) everywhere^ except at the discontinuities. More-
over, the signal exhibits ripples near the discontinuities. The peak amphtude of these rip^
W pies docs not decrease as increases, although the ripples do become compressed toward
the discontinuity, and the energy in the ripples converges to zero.

Example 4.5
Considcir the signal xit) whose Fourier ttansfbrm is

C4.1S)

This transform is iltustratcd in Figure 4.9(a), Using the synthesis equation (4.S), we can

X{j¨>

WW

Figure 4.9 foiriflr trarsform pair of Example 4.5: (a) Fourier transfi>rm for
BdmpJfl 4.5 and (b) the correspond) r>o Mim function.

"

Sec. i 1

Representation of Aperiodic Signals: The Continuous-Time Fourier Transforn}

295

then determine

sin Wi

(4.1?)

which ib. depicted in Figure 4.9(b).

Comparing Figures 4S and 4.9 Ot, equivalentlyj eqs. (416) and (4.17) with eqs. (4, IS) and (4.19), we see an interesting relaiionship. la each case, the Fourier Lransform
pair consists of a function of the form (sin ad)/h6 and a rectangular pulse. However, in Example 4.4, it is the signal jc{t) that ib a pulse, while in Example 4.5, it is the transform X.{jia). The special relationship that is apparent here is a direct consequence of tiie duality
properry for Fourier transforms, which we discuss in detail in Section 4.3.6.
Functions of the form given in eqs, (4,17) and (4.19) arise frequently in Fyurier
A analysis and in the study of LTl systems and are referred to as sincfiinctiotis, commonly
used precise form for the sine function is

&int<S) ^ sin^^

(4.20)

The sine function is plotted in Figure 4.1f>. Both of the signals in ecjs. (4.17) and (4 19)
can be expressed in terms of the sine function:

2 sinoj r
sinWt
Trf

= ivTi 2T\_ aiTii: TT
-- W fWt
-- Sine
I

Sfnc[e)

Figure 4. 10 The sine function
Finally, we can gain insight into one other property of the Fourier transform by examinmg Figure 4,9, which we have redrawn as Figure 4.11 for several different values of IV From this figure, we see that as IV inc;rease^> X(jii>) becomes broader, ivhile the main peak of x(t) at t - becomes tugher and the width of the first lobe of this sig-
< nal {\.t.^ the part of the signal foi \t\ ii/W) becomes narrower, in fact, in the Limii as
W ^ 'X, Xij(^) = 1 for all W, and consequently, from Example 4.3, we see that x{t) in
eq. (4,19) converges to an impulse as \K --* £. The behavior depicted in Figure 4.11 is
an example of the inverse relationship thai exitts between the time and frequency domains.

296

TheContiniJous'lime Fourier Transform

Chap. 4

- Wt

Wi

(a)

^it/W,

tAv

1

-w^

w.

(b)

4J Figtrre

1 Fourier Iransfo in pair of Figure 4.9 for several ditferent valuss of W.

aiid we can see a simjlar effect in Figure 4,8, W'herc an increase in Ti broadens Mi) hui
makes X{j<a) narrower. In Section 4.3.5, we provide an explanation of this behavior in the
tuntextof the scaling property of the Fourier transfonn.

4.2 THE FOURIER TRANSFORM FOR PERIODIC SIGIVALS
In the preceding section. Tve introduced the Fourier trajisfomi representation and gave
several examples. While our attention in that section was focused on aperiodic signals, we
can also develop Fourier transfomi representations for periodic signals, thus allowing us to

Sec. A.2

The Fojrier Transform tor Periodic Signals

297

considerttoth periodic and aperiodic signaJs wiihin a unified context Lnfaci, as we will see, we can construct the Fourier trarisfomi of a periodic signal directly from its Fourier series
representation. The resulting transfonia consists of a train of impulses in the frequency domain, with the areas of the impulses proportional to the Fourier series coefficients. This
will turv^ out to be a very useful representation.
To suggest the generaJ result^ lei us consider a signal jc{t) with Fourier iransfonti
= Xijfo) that is a single impulse of area 2'n: at tu tj^; thai is^

Xijof) = 27rS{<^> -tvii)

(4.21)

To determine the signal x{r) for which this is the Fourier transform, we can apply the
inverse transform relation, eq. (4.8), to obtain

1 r*" Z-JT i-^

More generally, if X(jw) h of the form of a huear combinadon ^f iitipubes equally spaced
in frequency, that is,

^+^

Kiju^) =

27rai6(w - ka>^),

(422)

then the application of eq, (4.8) yields

2! x(i) =

^fr^^*""'-

(423)

We see thav eq. (4,23) corresponds exactly to the Fourier series representation of a periodic

signal, as specified by eq. (338). Thus, the Fourier transfotiE of a periodic signal with

Fourier series cocfticitnls {af.} can be inieipreted as a tr^n of impukes occiimng at the

harmonically related frequencies and for which the area of the impulse at the jtth harmonic

^h frequency kdj^ is Itt times tbe

Founer series coefficient a/,.

ExampJe 4.6
Consider again the ^i^uare wave UlustraLed in Figure 4.1. The Fourier stnes coefficients
for this signal are

= (^i
and the Fourier traiiAfonn of the signal is

7 ~.

Z9S

The Continuous-Time Fourier Transform

Chap 4

which is sketched in Figure 4.12 for 7 = AT\ In comparison with Figure 3 J (a), the

uw only differences ait a proporti finality factor of 2v and the

of imputiei rather than a

bar graph.

^

2'

i^

.^4^-

11--

Frgune 4,1 Z Fourier transform of a s/mmetric periodic square wave

Example 4.7
Lei
xit) = sincaof. The Fourier serie.'; cwfficients for this signal are
1

fl-] - - I
2]'

= iii

0.

^ k

\

or

-1.

Thus, the Fourier transform is as shown in Figure 4J3<a). Similarly, ftu x(i) - cos[Jo^

the Fcurier series coefficient& are

1

= flt

0,

fc#l or -I.

The FogTitrtrjinsformof thissignai i.s depicted in Figure 4.13(b}, These two transfonns
will be tif considerable impoctance when we analyze sinusoidal modulation systems in
Chfipier a.

Sec 4.2

The Fourier Translorm for Pericdic Sigrval^

XO^)

1*0
a
{a! -It/]

TT/j

Wq

*u

299

x{i*i)

1

^

1^

4J3 = Figure

Fourier transfornns of {a] x{t)

s\r\^t: (b) jr(/) - coswo^

A signal Lhitt we will find extremely useful in our analymuf saitiptmg iystems iti Cnap-
ler 7 iij the impulse train
^ ^vhich is ptriodit "^ith period T. indicatetl in Figure 4.14U>- The Fourier series coef-
ficients for [his signal were computed in ExmnpL^ 3.S and are given by

Thar is, every Founer coefficient of the periodic impulst: tr;iin ha\ the ^Lsinn^ value. i/T".
SubstitLftmg this value fort/t iti CQ- (4.22) yields

^Oi . ?^sSL-^-*y

il--o:

r;

Thu5> the Ftiuner transform of apericfdic impulse train in the timedi)ma.in with period ?"i^ a periodic impXilK Uain in the frequency doimiain with period 2it/T, is skeiL-hed
in Figure 4,14tb) Here again, wtsee an illuslration of the inverse reLatmnship betweea the time and the frequency domains. As the spacing between the impulses in the time dL^m^in (irC,, the period) gets longeXi the spacing between the inipul^s in the frequency tbm^in (namely, the fundamentaE frequency) gets smaller.

300

TtiB Continuous-Time Fourier TTa4isform

Chap. 4

^^)

\U \

-ÈT -T

D

2T

X(j^)
T

At

23!

T

T

4t:

T

T

(b)

Ffgure 4.1* (a. Periodic itnpuise tr^in; (b) its Foijrier transform

43 PROPERTIES OP ThlE COISITJNUOUS-TIME FOURIER TRANSFORM

lo this and the folloiving two sections, v/e consider a ituini^er of properties of the Fourier
A transform. detailed listing of the&e properties is given inT^ble 4.1 in Section4.6. .\s was
the case for die Fourier series representation of periodic signals* these properties provide
us with a significant amount of insight mto the transform and into the relationship between the time-domaiti and trequency-domain descriptions of a signal. In addition, tnany of the
propeiTties are often useful in reducing the compjejcity of the evaluation of Fourier transforms or inverse transforms. Furthermore^ as described in the preceding section, there is a close relationship between the Fourier series and Fourier transform representations of a
periodic signal^ and using this relationship, we can translate many of the Fourier transform properties into corresponding Fourier series properties, which we discussed independently
in Chapter 3, (See, in particular, Section 3,5 and Table 3.1.)
Tliroughoiit the discussion in this section^ we will be referring firequentJy to functions of time and their Fourier transforms, and we will Had it convetiient to use a shorthand notation to indicate the pairing of ^ signal and its transform. As developed in Section 4, 1,
a signal j:(0 and its Founer transform X(jw) are related by die Fourier transfoim synthesis and analysis equations,

leq. (4.g)]

xit) =

Y(><d)fJ*^Vtu

(4.24)

and

[eq. (4.9)1

(4.25)

,

Sec. A.3

Properties of ttie ContinuoLJs-T^me Fourier Transform

30 f

We will sometimes find it convenient lo riefer to X{jbt) with the notation 5 {j:(f)} and

We to x{t) with the notation ^~^{Xij<x>)}.

will also refer to x{i) an<t X(Jiii) as a Fourier

transform pair with the notation

Thu$, with reference to Example 4, 1
1

and

1

e

IF

+ a J(ti

e-'^'uit)

1
a + Jtii

4.3.1 Unearily
If
and
then

^(0 ^-^ X(ji^)

^^ y{j)

YUu>),

-- ax(t) + byil) ' * aXijiij) + bYijo£.

{A.26)

The proof of eq. (4.26) follows directly by application of the analysis eq. (4.25) to axit) +
h byity The linearity property easily extended to a Unear combination of an arbitrary
number of signals.

4.3.2 Time Shifting
If
Chen

^- jr(rt

X(MX

-- At - h) * ^ e"^*^*^X( ;*!>).

(4.27)

J02

The ConU n uOLs-TimeFoJ lie r Transform

Chap, 4

To establish this property; consider eq. (4.24J :

R&placing rby t -- r^in. tliis equation, we obtain

277 j_.
Recognizing this as the synthesis equation for x{t -- ta), we conclude that
One consequence of the time-shift property is that a signal which is shift&d in dme does not have the magnitude of its Fourier transform altered That is, if we express Xijao)
in polar form as
then
TbuSi the effect of a dme shift on a signal is to introduce into its transform a phase shift,
namely, -tiit^, which is a linear function of Èt>.
ExdmpJe 4,9
To illustmie the us¨fuhiess of the Fourier transform linearity and time-shift properties, let us consider the evaluatian of the Fourier transfomi of the ^ignaJ x{t} shown in
Figijre 4.15(a).
First, live observe that x[t) can be expressed as the linear combinaJiOTi

where the signals x\_{t') and x^ii) are the rectangular pulse signals shown in Figure
4, 15(h) and (c). TheUn using the result from Example 4,4> wc obtain

-- y,. .
X\{ju})

=

2sin(W2)

,
and

XVz.im).

^

2siii(5w/2)
-.

Finally, nsing the lineanty and tinie-shift properties of tfie Fourier transform yields

- Xf;w)

^-j5:^Q [ sii](a>/2) + 25iii(3a>/2) |

Sec, 4,3

Properties ot the tontinuous-Time Fourier Transform

xftj
V5
1

303

(a)
5tl(t) 1

--i

1

1

a

2

{b)

1, ^i^)

1^
2 (C)
Figure 4.15 DecompQsino a signaJ into the linear combination of two simpler Signals (a) TTi& signal x{t) for Example 4.9; (b) and {a) Uie two component signals used to represent ^(1)^

4.3.3 ConjugatJon and Conjugate Symmetry
The conjugation property state* that if
-- ^If) * * Xijo}\
then

x\i) ^^^X'i'jt^l

(4.28)

This property follows from the evaluation of the complex conjugate of eq. (4.25):

^ Replacing -- by cu, we see that

r X\-jw) =

x*{t}e-"''' dt.

<4.29)

304

"RieContinLMiiJS'Tinnfi FoLher Transform

Chap A

Retogni^ing that the right-hand side of eq, (4.29) is the Fourier transform analysis equation

we for x^it)^

obiain the relation given in eq, (4,28),

The conjugation property allows us to show that if j:(/) is real, then X(jfii) has con-

jugate ^ymmerry; that is.

Ki-jtxj) = X'(jo^)

[x{t)K^l

(4.30)

= Specifically, if xit) is real so that x*(i)

x(t), w^ have, from eq. (4.29X

X\-j<a) = j xit)e^'dt = Xijwl

and eq. (4.50)foKows by replacing *È> with -- w. From Example 4.1, with jc(f) = e~'^^u(t\

and

Xija,) =

^

+ a

]ii}

a- ju^

As one consequenct of eq. (4.30), if we express X(jtit) in rectangular form as X(Jq)) = (k^XiJta)} + j0MXUt^)i

then if -r(0 is real,

(R^{X(jiAt)} = (R4^(-£]

and

^m{Xij{i>)} = -&m{X{-jUf}l

That is, the real part of ttie Fourier transform is an e^^en function of frequency, and the
imaginary part is an add function of frequency. Similarly, if wc es^press Xijo}) in polar
form as

X(jio\ - ]X(£|^^*^^^^>,

then it follows from eq, {430) that |Y(/ftit| is an even function of it£ and -KXiJa^} is an
odd function of w. Thns, when computing or displaying the Fourier transform of a real-
valued signal, the real and imaginary parts or magnitude and phase of the transform need only be specified for positive frequencies, as the values for negative frequencies can be
determined directly firom the values for ui > using the relationships just derived.
As a funher consequence of eq, {4JO), if A(r) is both real and even, then Xijtu) will
also be real and even. To see this, we write

X(-Jo) - f xityeJ'^^dt,

Sec. 4 3

Properties of the Continoous-Tlme Fourier Traisform

or, with the substitution t = - t.

Since j:('t) ^ x(r), we have

30^

Thus, X{Jut) is an even function. This, togftther with eq. (4.30), also requires that

XQm) X^<j(D) ^

[i.e., that X{Jti>) is real]. Example 4.2 iliuslrates this property for the

real, even signal e- "^'l In a similar manner, it can be shown that if jf(r) is a real and odd
function of time, so that jc(0 = - ^(-f), then X(j<a) is purely imaginary and odd.

Finally^ as was discussed in Chapter 1, a real function jc<f) can always be expressed

in terms of the sum of an even function jc^(j) = Kv{x{t)} and an odd function Xffit} ^

Od{j^t)}- that is,

xM = J((t)

+ x.ity

From the linearity of the Fourier transform,

nx(i)} = ^U,{t)} + J{xM},

and from the preceding discussion, ^{xt(t)} is a real function and J{x,,it)} is purely imag-
inary. Thus, we can conclude that, with x(i} real,

-- x(j) * ^XOoj),

^ Sv{jf(0}

iS{.^{XiJa>)l

One use of these symmetry properties is illusrrated in the following example.
Example 4J0
Consider again the Fourier transform evalualion of E)^i^llp]e 4.2 for the signal xij\ =
> ^-flkl Inhere (J 0, This time wc *iU utilize die symmetry properties of the Fourier
transfDmi to aid the evaluation proce&Sr
From Example 4. 1, we have

^ f-^' 11(f)

^
a -\- jio

> < Note that for i 0, jf(/) equals e-^'uU), while for f 0, x(i) take^ on nunor tmagt
values. That is.

306

The Contirnious-Time Fourier Transtorm

Chap. 4

~

[

2

.

Since f "'nir) Is real valued, the symmetry properties of the Founcr trjmsform lead us
to conclQilc thai
-- Èvff "'it{t}} ' * tR^
ir bllows that
2-3

which is [he same aj; the answer fi^und in Example 4.2.
4.3,4 Differentiation and Integration
Let x{t) be a signal with Fourier transform Xijw). Then, by dJfferentiatinfi both sides of
the Fourier transform synthesis equation (4.24), we obtain

dt Therefore,

jtiXijoi). dt

(4.:il)

This is a particularly important property, as it replaces the operation of differentiation in

We the time domain with that of muIdplicatLon by jta in the frequency domain.

will find

the substitution to be extremely useful in our discussion in Section 4.7 on the use of Fourier

transforms for the analysis of LTI systems described by differential equations.
m Since differentiation in the time domain corresponds to multiplication by ju^ the

frequency domain, ope might conclude that integration should involve division by jw in

the frequency domain. This is indeed the case, but it is only one part of the picture. The

precise relationship is

(4.:i2)
The impulse term on the nght-hand side of eq. (4.3?) reflects the dc or average value that can result from integration.
M The use of eqs . (4 . ) ivmd (4. 32) is illustrated in the ne xt two ex ampl es.

2

Sec. ^.3

Properties of the Continuous-Tine Fourier Transforrr

307

Exartipfe 4. ! 1

Let u¨ dcttimint: ihc Fuurier transfonn X{J<o) of the unit step x(t) = u{t)^ making use
of cq, (4-32) and the knowledge ihat

-- = = f^it)

5(i) *

. C(;w)

L

Notmj that

and taking the Fourier transform uf both sideih, we obtain

where we have used tht: integration property listed in Table 4,1. Since Gijw) - ], wc
conclude tha.t

XUix)) -

+ 7TS{tli).

(4.33)

Observe that we can apply the differentiatiott property of eq. (4.31) to recover the
trans-form of the impulse. That is.

1^ + 7r6(w> = 1.

whtre the last equality follows from the fact that tuS^oj) = 0.
Example 4. 1
Suppose thac we wish ir> calculate the Fourier transfonn X(/w£ for the signal K^f) displayed in Figure 4 16(a}. Ralher than applying thi; Fourier integral djrectly to x{J\. we
Iti'^ttMid consider the signal

1--
^?
(a}

-1

1

t

<b}

T

-1

-1

Figure 4.16 (a) A signal x{t) for which the Fourier transform >s to be evaluated; (b) representation otthe derivative of x{t) as the sum of two component*

BOB

The ContinuOJJS-Time Fourier TransfDrm

Chap. A

A^ i|luslr4lt<I in Figure 4,16<b}, gi_s) is thesnmof uiectangularpulsc and two impulses. ITi-t: f'yurier rransfornis of each of these component signals may be detennJriL^d frotn
Tahlc 4.2:
ou..^{^) -- e'*^ -- ^- "^

NtHcThat G(0) = 0. Us-ingthe integration property, w*j obtain.

With O{0) ^

XUm) = 9S1^ + 7rGtO|È(w|.
J^
thi,s becomes

XijiM}) - -- , -
JUf-

.
;
JtJ

The expjession for X(ju}) is purely imaginary and [>dd, which li consistent with tJ^e fact
rhav x{i) is real and udd,

4.3-5 Time and Frequency Scaling
If

then

*-- x{t)

> Xijiol

(434)

-- where aissL real constant This property foUows directly from the definition of the Fourier
trans form speci ficall y.

^[xiat)] = [

xiat)e-J'''dt.

Using the subsmution r = at^ we obtain

^x{m)) =

'-"'
1
a

\vhicb correspsnds to eq. (4 34). Thus, aside from the amplitude factor l/|o[, a Imeai staling in time hy a factor of a eyiresponds to a linear staling in frequency by a factor of \/a.
and vice versa AJsc, letting a = - 1 , we see from cq. (4.M) that

S¨c 4.3

Properties of the Contii^uous-Tlme Fonner Transform

30fl

^i-t) ^^^ X(->tu),

I

-^

^

r

(4.35)

That IS, r&versmg a signal in time also reverses its Fourier transform.
A common tllLStr:ition of eq. (4,34) is the effect on frequency content that results
when an audiotape is recorded at one speed and played back at a tiifferenl speed. If the pUybact speed is higher than the recwding speed, cotr^spomliTig tD compression in lime
> (i.e., d 1)* then the spectrum i* expaiwjed in frequency (i.e., the audible effeci is that the
playback frequencies are higher). Conversely, the signal played back will be scaled down
< in frequency if the playback speed is slower than the recording speed (0 a < 1). Fot
example, if a recording of the sound of a small bell ringing is played back at a reduced
speed, the result will sound like the chiming of a larger and deeper sounding bell. The scaling property is another example of the inverse relationship between time
and frequency that we have already encountered on several occasions. For example, we have seen that as. we increase the period of a ^inusaidal signal, we decrease its frequency. Also, as we saw in Exartiple 4,5 (see Figure 4. Jl). if we consider the transfoin]

then as we increase IV, the inverse (ransform of X{j<o) becomes narrower and taller and
W approaches an impulse as --> ¨, Finally, in Example 4.8, we saw that the spacing lo the
frequericy domain between impulses in the Fourier transform of a periodic impulse train is inversely proportional to the spacing in the time domain.
The inverse relationship between the time and frequency domains is of great importance in a variety of signal and systems contexts, including filtering and filler design, and we wjU encounter its cotisequ^nces on Qumeroiis CiCcasioTis in the rtmaindcr of the boot. In addition, the reader may very well come across the implications of thi^ property in studying a wide variety of other topics in science and engireering. One example is the uncertainty principle in physics; another is illustrated in Problem 4.49
4.3.6 Duafit/
By compairing the Iran sform and mver^e transform relations given in cqs. (4 24) and (4.25), we observe thatthese equations aie similar, but not quite identi^^al, inform. This symmetry leads to a pn>pcity of the Fourier transform referred to as duality. In Example 4.5, we alluded to duality when we noted the relationship that eitists between the Fourier transfurm pairs of E^amptes 4.4 and 4.5. In the former example we derived the Ft-urier transtorm
pair

^"'>-fou, [_

|jf| ;>l;^L ^'^;^.U-)=^("y ^.

while in the latter we considered the pair
sin n't J ^ ^ ,

f1

< w |tt>|

(4.36)

310

^i[t)

-T,

T,

The Continue lis-Time Fourier Transform

Chap. 4

XitJw}

¨2(H

-w w

Figure 4.1 7 and (4.37).

Relationship between the FoLner tfansfortri pafrs af eqs, {4,3)

The two Fourier transform pair^ and the relotionshjp between them are depicted in
Figure 4.17.
The syrnmetiy exhibited by these two examples extends to Fourier transforms in general. Specifically, because of the symmetry between eqs. (4.24) and (4.25X for any transform pair, there is a dual pair with the time and frequency variables interchanged.
This is best illustrated through an example.

Example 4,13
Let LIS consider using duality to fi nd the Fourier transform G{j<a ) of the signal

=2

S<()

+^'

1

In Example 4.2 ^^'e eDeDunteied a FoLuier transfoim pair in which the Fourier transform,
as a function of in, had -a form similar to th^t of the sigtia] x(t) Specifically, suppose we
coQsidei a signal Kit) ^^^ae Fourier transfiima is

Then, from Example 4.2,

XU(^) - 1 +w2

<() = e^-2-A

X(;¨) =

2'

] -{-til

Sec. 4.3

ProperliBs of the Continuous-Tima Fourier Transfornn

The synthesis equatioA f[ir\his Fourier transfonri pair i^

_ iii\

\e^'"d^.

Multiplying this equation by 2w atid replacing i by -/, we obtain

311

Now, interchanging the nam^s of iKe variables t and itJ, we find that

2^È -^^^

1 +/2 e f'^'dt.

{4M)

The nglit-hand side yf eq. (4r38> is The Founer transform aiialysiRcqu-atiot^ for2/{l + r\ and thus^ we conclude that

= 27rf--^L
1 -f f2J

The duality property can also be used to detertnine t>r to suggest other properties of Fourier transforms. Specifically, if there are characteristics of a fiiuctioTi of time that have implications with regard to the Fourier transform, then the same characteristics associated with a function of frequency will haveJua/ imphcations in the time domain. For example, in Section 4,3.4, we saw chM differentiation in the time d^tnain corresponds to multiplica-
tion by jto in the frequency domain. From the preceding discussion, we might then suspea
that multiplicatiot^ by jt in the time domain corresponds roughly to different iation in the frequency domain. To dttermine the precise form of this dual property, we can proceed in a fashion exactly analogous to that used in Section 4,3.4. Thus, if we differentiate the
analysis equation (4.25) with respect to ot^ we obtain

dXQ^)
d<t>

-jtx{t)e~f'^'t}t.

(4.39;

That is.

Similarly, we can derive the dual properties of eqs. (4.27) and (4,32):
e^^^'^it}*-^XiJ{<o-ii^^)) and

(4.40) C4.41)

(4,42)

4

3\2

^hft Cojitinuous-Time Fojrier Transform

Chip. 4

4.3.7 Parsevaf's Relation
If xir) and A"(/w) are a Fourier transfoim pair, then

i I i*)i'^. -

|X(yw)pÈfi^.

{4 43)

This expressioiu referred to as Parseval's relation, follows from direct application of the Fourierlransform. Specifically!

xUyl^t =
I

xU)x^{i)d/

Mr)

( X*{jof)e-f'^'dw dh

Itt \.

Reversing the order of integration gives

x{tfdt =
2ir

X^ijw)

j(Oe ^"'dt d(È>.

TTie bracketed term is simply the Fourier transfomi of x\ r); thus,

^V \x{ifds=

\X<M\^do>.

f

The term on the left-hand side of eq. (4.43) is the total energy in the signal x(0-
Parseval's relation says that this total energy may be determined either by computing the
energy per unit time (|j:(Op) and integrating aver all time or by computing the energy per ijnitfrequency(A^(ju>)|^/2;T>andintegratingoverall frequencies. For this reason, |X(^ft^)lis often referred to as the energy-density spectrum of the signal x<j). (See also Problem 4.45.) Note thai Parseval's relation for finite-eneigy signals is the direct connterpart of Parseval's relation for periodic signals (eq. 3.67), which states that the average /Jowvr of
a penodic signal equals the sum af the average powers of its individual harmontc compo-
nents, which in turn arc equal to the squared magnitudes of the Fourier scries coefficients. Parseval's relation and ether Fourier transform propertied are often useful in deter-
mining some time domain characteristics of a signal directly from the Fourier transft>rm. The next example Is a simple illustration of this.
Exampfe 4. 1
For tilth of the Fourier transforms shown in Figure 4. 1 8, \vc wish toe vnjuate the lollowing time-domain CApressiansi

-[ \x{f)\-dt

D = ^.(0
r-fi

Sec 4 3

Properties of the Conlfnuous-Time T^utnerTra^&torm

y.{i^)

L

vir/2

--1

-0-^

0$

"1

(a)

JVTT

313

Figure 4.16 Ths Fourier transforms DOnsidared in Example 4 14

To evaluate E in the ftequency domain, we may use Patstvar* relation- Thai is.
^4.44)

which e val uates. to | foi Figure 4. 1 8^a) and to I f&r Figure 4. 1 8(b).
D To evaluate in the frequency dDmain> we first use the diffenentiatitin property to
observe that

d

-^

Nt>ting ihitt

D = siO} =

G{jb})dii>,

we ^;onclutl5:

-- Z^

j jiitX{jtAt)tStU

^V which ev;i]uate!> lo zero [or Figure 4.]K(ii> and to -

for Figure 4J!^(b)-

i4.45) <4.46)

There are many fither properties of the Fourier iransfotTti in addition to those we have already disct^s^ed. In the next two sections we present two specific properties that play

--

3M

The Continuous-Time Fourier Transform

Chap. A

panicularly ceniriil roles in the study of LTI syHtems and rhdr applicaiions The hrst of
these, discussed in Section 4.4, is referred to as the camolurion property, which is ceniriil to many signals and systems applications, including filtering. The second, discussed in Section 4.5^ is referred to as the mulupUtanon property, and it pidvides the foundation for nur discussion of sampling in Chapter '^ and amplitude modulation in Chapter 8, In Section 4.6, we summarize the pn>penies of the Fourier transform.

4.4 THE CONVOLUTJON PROPERTY

As we saw in Chapter 3, if a periodic signal is represented in a Fourier iSeries i.e., at>
a linear combination of harmonically related complex exptmentials, as in cl (33g) then die response of an LTI system to this input can also be represented by a Fourier series. Because complex exponentialsareeigcnfunctions of LTI systems, the Fourier serries coefficients of die output are those of the input multiplied by the frequency response of the system evaluated at the corresponding harmonic frequencies.
In this section, we extend this result to the situation in which the signals areaporiodic.
Wc tirsl derive the property somewhat informally, to build on the intuition wc developed for
periodic signals in Chapter 3, and then provide a brief, formal derivation staillnfi direoUy from the convolution integral.
Recall our interpretation of the Hfluricr trans foim synthesis equation as an expression for xit) as a linear combination of cumplex exponentials. Specifically, referring back to
^ eq, (4,7), x{t) is expressed the limit of a smn; that is,

-- hm -- xU) -

I T""^
X{ji^)e^'^'dw =

'"''
>^ 1 X(jk^^^)e'^^''^''m^

k - y:

\MT)

As developed in Sections 3.2 and 3,8, the resptmse of a linear system with impulse response
h([) to a complex exponential e-^^""'' is HijkiOo)e^''*''*'\ where

W(jW(i) =
J

h{t)e-^'''^''dj

(^,43)

We can recognize the frequency response H{ju)\ as defined in eq. (3. 1 21 ), as the Fourier
transform of the system impulse response. In other words, the Fourier transform of the
impulse response (evaluated at w ^ A:6>n) is the complex scaling factor that the LTI sy&teni
applies to the eigenfunction eJ^"^-*'. From superposition Isee e<]. (3.124)], we then have

and thus, from eq. (4.47), the response of Ihe linear system to xiT) is

></) =

--- V I
Urn

^"^
X{jki^fi)H{jkfat))ef^'^'''if,ft

*-"

277 _

M.49)

SeD- AA

The Con^^olution Property

Since yit) and its Fourier tranifomi Yijio) are related by

Jtt J ^
we can identify Y{Jo>) from eq. (4.49), yielding

As a more formal derivatjtjn* we consider the convolution integral

315
(4.50) (4.51) (4.52)

We desire Yij(ft\ which is

-- TO J --or

J^^'dJ.

[4.5?-)

Interchanging the order of integration and noting that xir) does not depend on t, we have

y(jco) -

xiT)

1
- hit T)e ^'^'dt dr.

(4.54)

By the time-shift property, eq. (4,27). the hracketed term is e ^"'^Hijitt). Substituting this
into eq, (4 54) yields

K(£ =

x{T)e-^''^H{j^)dT - Hijiii)

x{T)e-^''^dr.

(4.55)

Ttie integral is X{j(tiX and hence.
rU^) = Hiji^iXiji^).
That is.

^ v<r>

ft(t)* jc(0

L

y;£ - Mowo).

t4,56^

Equation (4,56> is of major importance in signal and system analysis. As expresjjed in this equation, the fourier transform maps the convolution of two signals inio the pnjduct of their Fourier transforms. H(jo}\ the Fourier transform of the impulse response, is the frcqiierKy response as defined in eq. (3 121) and captures the change in complex amplitude of the Fourier trdnsform of the input at each frequency ut. For example, in frequency-
= selective filtering we may want to have Hijttf} 1 over ont range of frequencies, so that
the frequency components in this band experience little or no attenuation or change due to
the system, while over another range of frequencies we may want to have H{jtii) ^ 0, so
that compot^ents in this range are eliminated or significantly attenuated.

316

The Continuous-Time Fourier Trsrsform

Chap. 4

The frequency respon&e H{j(o) plays is imponant a role in the analyiis of LTI systems as dijes its inverse transforjTi, the unil impulse response For one thing, since h{r) completely characterises an LTI systenfi, Th&n so must Hijiii). In addition, many of the properties of LTI sysietns Lan be conveniently interpreted iti terms of HijtD). For example, in Section 2.3, we saw that the irapulsc response of the cascade of Two LTI systems
is the convolution of the impulse responses of die Ltwlividual systems and that the overall in:^puls.e response does not depend on the order in which the systems are ciiscaided
Using eq (4.56K wc can rephrase lihis in temis of frequency responses. As illustrated in
Figure 4.19, since the impulse response of the cascade of two LTI systems is the convolution of the individual impulse respotises, the convolution property then implies that the ijverall frequenc)' response of the ca.scade of two systetris is simply the product of the individual frequency responses. From this observation, it is then clear that the overall frequency response does not depend on the otrder of the cascade.

x[t)

Hi(j^

y\^\^)

m

(a)

m

H,(j:.*)Hj(jt^)

*- vtt)

{b)

^(t)

H^^jtoJ

Hi[}^

(c)

y(ij Figure 4,19 Three equivalent LTI
systems. Here, each block represents an LTI system with the indicated frequency resptanse.

As discussed in SecdDu 4.1,2, convergence of the Fourier transform is guaranteed only under certain conditions, and consequently, the frequency response cannot be defined for every LTI system. If, however, an LTI system is stable, then^ as we saw in Section 2.3.7 and Problem 2,^9, its impulse response is absolutely integrablc; that is.

< \h{t)\dt

(4.57)

Equation {4.57) is one of the three Diiichlet conditions that together guarantee the exis-
tence of the Fourier transfomi fi{Jw) of MO- T^ius, assuming that hit) satisfies the odier two conditions, as essentially all signals of physical or practical significance cio, we see
that a stable LTI system has a frequency response M{jtj)).
In using Fourier analysis to study LTf systems, we will be restricting ourselves
to systeuis whose impulse responses possess Fourier transforms. In order to use trans-
form techniques to examine unstable LTI systems we will develop a general rzati on of

7

Sec. 4.4

The C04ivo!utiOTi Property

31

We the continuous-time Fourier transform, the Laplace tran&foritiK

defer this discus&ion to

Chapter 9, and until then we will consider the many ptDbletns and practical applications

that we can analyze using the Fourier transfomi.

4-4 J Examples
To illustrate the convolution property ajid its (Application:! further, let us consider several
exatt^les.

Example 4.15

CoDsider a continuous-time LTI system with inipul^ response

= - h{t)

&ii

ffl).

(4.5S)

The frequency response of this system is the Fourier tran&form of hit\ and is given by

Hijio) ^ e -'"'".

(4 59)

llius, for any input x(t) \vith Fourier transfonn X{jtit), the Fourier transform of the output
is

= VOoi) fi{j***)X{jto)

(4.60)

Utis result, in fact, is consistent with ihc time-shift property of Section 4.3,2. Specifi-
-- cally, a system for which the impulse response is S(t tf]) applies a time shift of r^ to the
inputs that is,

= - yU)

j(f

tit).

m 'Rius, the shifting propeny given eq. (4.27) also yielcU cq, (4,60), Note that, either from
our di^ussion in Section 4.3.2 or difccdy from eq, (.4.59)> the frequcDcy response of a
systemthati&apuretimeshjf^h^ unity magnitudeatEil]frequeiK;ies(i.e., l^'-^'^^nl = i)
and has a phase characteristic -a>/o that is^ a linear function of tti.

Example 4.16
-- As a second example, let us examine a differentiator that is, an LTI system for which
the itlput xit) and the output yit) arc related by

From the differenhatiDn property of Section 4.3,4, njio) - jtoXijtol

(4.61)

Consequently, from eq. f4.56), it follows that the frequency response of a differentiator
is

= Hijoi) joi.

(4.62)

318

The Continuous-Time Fourier Transfcrin

Chap. 4

Example 4.17
-- Consider an LntegiaLtDr that is, anLTl si'stem &peciiied by the equation

^d The impulse response for this systcTn is the utxit step uitU

thtrefoTe, Ctj^ih Esiam-

ple 4.1 1 and eq. (4.3^), the frequency response ^>f the system is

//( ji>) = -^ + ir5(w).

Then using eq. (4,56), we have

which is consistent with the integjacion property of eq. (4.32).

Exatnpfe 4.18

As ve discu.^sed in SectioTt 3 9,2, frequency-SKeJecEive filtering is accomplished with an
LTI system whose frequenty jcsponse Mijdt) passes thedeslred range of frequvn-cies uimI aiEnificaniily attenuated frequencies outside that range. Fot e:tamplÈ, considtr the ideal Itiwpass filter introduced in Section 3.9.2, ivhich has the frequency reponse illustrated in Figure 4,20 and ^Lven by

HO) =

\ai\> <Ýt,'

(4.63)

Now that we have developed the Fourier transfbnti representation, we know thai the
impulse response h{t) of this ide^l llHeris [he inverse transfortn of eq, (4.63). IJsitig the
result in Example 4.5, we then have

hit) = Sin ioj

(4.64)

whith is plotted in Figure 4.21.

1
-- -- -- -- ^--Slopband--'^j-' Paasb^-d '-p Stopband *
Fkrune 4vZ0 Frequency respotrse of an ideal lowpass filter.

Sec. 4.4

The (kmvolution Property

319

Figure 4,2 1 LmpuVst re^pofise ot an idea^ lowpass fili)er.

From Example 4. 1 Sj we can begin to see some of the issues that arise in filter design

that involve looldng in both the time and frequency <ioraains. In particulai, while the ideaJ

lowpass filt&rdoes have perfect frequency selectivity, its impulse response has some char-

< acteristics that may not be desirable. First, note that h{t) is not zero for r

Consequently*

the ideal lowpa^s filter is not causal, and thus, in applications requiring causal systems,

we the ideal filter is not an optioii. Moreover, a^

di&cnss in Chapter 6, even if causality

is not an essential constraint, the ideal fiUer is not easy to approximate closely, and non-

ideal fil ters that are more easily implemented are typically preferred. Furthermore , in some

applications (.such as the automobile suspension system discussed in Section 6.7, 1 ), oscil-
latory behavioT in the impulse response of a lowpass filter may be undesirable. In such

applicMtcns the tiine domain characteristics of the ideal lowpass filter, as shown in Fig-
ure 4.21, may be unacceptable, implying that we may need (o trade Dff frequency- domain

chaiacteristics such as ideal frequency selecdvity with time-domain properties.

For example, consider the LTI system with impulse response

ME) = e-^u(cV

(4.65)

The frequency response of this system is

J^Ow)

=

T
jfi)

-

r

(4.66)

Comparii^ eqs. (3,145) and (4.66), we see that this system can be implemented with

RC the simple

cLrctiit discussed in Secliort 3,10. The impulse response and the m&gnitude

of the frequency response are shown in Figure 4.22. WMle the system does not have the

strong frequency selectivity of the ideal lowpass filter, it is causal and has an impulse

response that decays monotonically^ i.e.* without oscillations. This hlter or somewhat more

complex ones corresponding to higher order differential equadons are quite frequently

preferred to ideal filters because of their causality, ease of implementatian, and HexibUity

in allowing trade-offs, among other design considerations such as frequency selectivity and oscillatory behavior in the time domaia Many of these issues will be discussed in

more detail in Chapter 6.

The convolution property is often useful in evaluating the convolution integral--i.e..

in computing the response of LTI systems. This is illtistrated in the next example.

320

The Contirtuci US-Time Fourier Transform

Chap 4

(a)

{b)
Figure 4.22 {i) Impulse response of i\\e LTI system in eq. (4,65),
(t>) magnitude of Ihe frec^uency response of ;he system.
Example 4J9
ConBJder the response af an LTI syjitem with impulse nes^ponse

(o the input signal

Rather than computing y(/> = j(r) * /i(r) directly, let us transform the problem into the frequency domain. From Enamtple 4,1, the Fourier transforms of x(t)^nd hu) are
1

anct Therefore,

H(Jf^) =
a 4- juj

Yij<^)= -r {a. 'V jifi){h -^ JoiY

(4.67)

To determine the output ^tO? ""^^ w^ish to obtain the inverse transfnrin of Vij'cu). This i^ most <:imply done by c^ipanding Yijiti) in a partial-fraction ^xp^osion. Such expansions are eAtremely useful in evaluating inverse transforms, and 'he general mcth(i(j for petfonaing a purtial-fraction. expansion is-de-veJoped in thg apptntJi^. f-'orthis

'

Sec AA

The tomvolLJtion Property

321

example, assuming that b 9^ a, the partial fractioD expansion for Y{J<i}) takas the form

y(£ = A a -\- jiii

B b + jta'

(4.68)

where A and B are constants to be determined. One way to find A and B is to equate the
right-hand sides of eqs. (4.67) and (4.6R)^ multiply both sides by ffi -f Jof](.t + jiti)^ and
A solve for and B. AltemaiiveLy, in the appendix we present a niore general and etticient
method for computing the coefflctctiis in partial -fracttoti e?tpansLon& such as eq. (4.68)
Using cither of these approaches, wc find that

A

=

1
b-a

=

-B,

and ttierefore^

y(£ -
b-a [ fl+ jtii

b 4 jtii J

(4.69)

The invets* tran&fOTin for each of the two terms in eq. f4.69) can be recognized by iiuspection. Using the lineaiity property of Section 4.3. 1 , we have

b-a = y<0

1

\e-'"u(t)-e

Ar.
^'iiCOl

When it = o^ the partifd fmction expansion of eq. (4.69) is not valid. Howtvei, with b = a, eq, f4.67) becomes

Kecogjiizing this ia

VU^) -

1

[a + ji^y

1
(n + JtoV

I

^dm

+ .a

/<ii J

we can use the dual of the differentiation fMBperty^ as gjven in eq. (4.40). TTius,

5
f"'¨(0

1
a + JQ>

le ^'uiiy

A.

1

dm [ a + yto J

]

+ (fl

jtii)^

and consequently,

- y{t)

te-¯'u{t).

Example 4.20
As anothei iUustxabon of the usefulness of rhe colLvolutioa property, Let us consider the
problem of detErmimng the response of axi ideal lowpass filter to an inpjjt signal Jt(r) that has the fonn of a sine function. That is.
Mt) -
Of course^ the impulse respwnse of the idea] ]owpass filter is of a similar form, namely^

322

The Continuous-Time Fojrier Transform

Chap, 4

h(n =
7Tt
The fijtcr [)ulput y(i) will therefore be (h.c o^nvolulion of iwo sine functions, which, as wc
A nuw shf] w, also turns oul to be a sine function. partJcuLiuly cunvcn^enl way of deriving
this result is to first observe thut
Y(j^) = X(jio)fi(jiol
wher^

elsewhere

and

mjaf) =

]

^ \ti>\

Of,

ij elsewhere

Therefore*

ru^) -

L

^ \tV]

(Jft

elsewtiere

where iiJu is the smaller of ihe two ruimber^w, anda>,. Finally, the in t^erseFoaner transfbim of Yijtv) is given by

y(') = {

TTt

TTt

if eOj T^ uff

That is, depending upon which of w^ and ^Oj is smaller, die output is equal to either xit) or ft(/)

4.5 THE MULTJPLICATION PROPERTY

The convolution property states that convolution in the iTtne domain cotresponds to mullip]it;atioii in the/requency dgmain. Because (jf duality between the time and frequency
domains, we would expect a dual propeny also to hoM (i.e., that muhiplication in the time
dotnain cciiresponds to convolution in the frequency doma^in). Specifically,

^ r(:) ^ mpiO

R(j(o} = ^[Sijo})* Fijian.

(4.70)

This can be shown by exploiting duality as discus.<>ed in Section 4.3,6, together with the ci^nvolution property, or by directly using the Fourier transform relatioris in a manner anal-
ogous to the procedure used in deriving the convolution property.
MuIttpHcation of one signal by another can be thought of as using one signal to scale or modulate the amplitude of the other, and consequently, the multiplication of two sijenali i.s ofren referred to as amplitude modutatiotXr For this reason, eq. (4.70) is sometimes

Sec. 4.5

The Multiplication Property

323

referred to aij the modulaUon property. Ab we shcilL see in Chapters 7 and 8, this property has several very important applications. To illustrate eq. (4,70), and to suggest one of the
applications that we will discuss in subsequent chapters, let us consider ^veral exuTRples,
Exampfe 4.21
Let s[t) be a signal whcitie spectnim i'(/w> is depicted in Figure 4 2J(a) Alsn, cnn^ider
the signal
pU) = cos^Qt Then

a.s sketched in Figure 4. 23fb), and ihespecinjm H{jto) yf rf/) = s{J)pifi is obtained by S^J

PM
Wq
P)

UlQ

LLi

^ Rfj*^) -

[S(i(M) . PCJ¨->1

A/2--

(~^0-^i) (-">o+^l)
ic)

Figure 4,Z3 Use of the mLlliphcation property in Example 4 21 [a) the

= Fourier transform o* a sigiial 5(f); (b) the Fourier transform (A p{f}

ca^t^t,

[c] the Fourier transform of r{t) = s{t)p{t).

324

The Corrtirrjous-Time Fojner Transform

Chap. 4

an application of eq. (4.70)^ yielding
1

- ^S(;(w -wd£- ^5(;Cw +i.jcj)).

(4.71>

> which is iiketchfd in Figure 4.23(c) Hcr-e we have assumed that oio cui, sii that the
two Qonzero portioas of R(jtit) do not overlap. Cltarly, thft spectrum of r{s) (jtmsisVft <ir the ium of two shifted and scaled version.'^ of S{jb>h
From eq. 14,71) and from Figure 423, we tec th^t all of the infrtTmation in the signal if/) is prc^e^vcd when we multiply ihis signal by a sLauscidalsigixaL although the information has been shifted to higher fr^uencLes, This fact fornis the basis for sinusoidal amplitude modulation systems foTCrtmmunications. Inihe next example, we leam how we can recover the original sigcial s(tf from the amplitude-modulated signal r|f).

ExampJe 4.22
L¨t LJ5 now coDsider r{t) a.s abtatned in Example 4.21, and let

where, again, p(t) = cosci^of. Then, R'Jio), Pijo})^ and G(jio] jie a>. shewn in
Figure 4r24.
From Figure 4.24(c) and the linearity of the Fourier tiansfom, we iee thai gU) is tht sum of C l/2)s(0 and a signal with a spectnim that is nonzero only at higher frequen -

yx -*^

F[jw)
- A/2
(a) Ptjt.)

jy^
*'^

-4l>0

lb)

A/4
-2^^
Fi9ure 4.2* Spertra of Signals considered in Example 4.22: (i) R{fat),
(b) P(;¨); (c) G{/a^).

Sec. 4.5

The Muitiphcitton Property

325

cie& (centered around Ý2a*fl). Suppose then that we apply the signal f^(i) as the input to

a frequency selective !owpafti> filter \^/tth frequency response H{jb^) that i^ constant lil

> < low frequencies (hay, for |flj |

it* i ) and zero at high frequencies (for IwJ

wj). Then

the output of this system will hav¨ as it& spectmm f/(jft>)G(jdi) whkh^ because of the

particular choice ofHijut), will be a scded replica of 5(^). Thertfore, the output itself
will be a scaled version cf j(f). In Chapter S, we eJLpand significantly oti this id¨a as we

develop in detail tlie fundamentals of ampUlude modulation.

Example 4.23
Another illu^tTatiori of tht usefulness of the Fourier transform multiplication properly is provided by the problem of determini:ig the Fourier transform of the signal

X\i}

--

sin(/) sin(i/3)

-r

.

J\k key here is to rccoginxe x{i) as the pjodfucl of t^vo sitic functions.

Applying the multiplication property of the Fourier transform, we tTbtain

Noting that ihe Fourier transfomi of each sine function is a rectangular pulse, v^^ can proceed to crmvolve those pulseii to obtain the function X^jto) displayed in Figuiie 4.25.

KM

.^

_3

_1

2

Z

1/2

:^w

1

a

2

^

Frgurt 4,25 The Fourier transform Of x{t] ia Example 4 23.

4.5. T Frequency-Selective Filtering with Variable Center Frequency

My As suggested iiiExamples 421 and 4.22 and developed more

it^ Chapter S, one of the

importatit applications of the multiplication property is amplitude modulation ir commu-

nicaljon systems. Another importnnt application is in the implementation of fiequency-

jjclective bandpass filters with turiable center frequencies that can be adjusted by the
simple tum of a dial. In a frequency-selective bandpass filter built with elements such

as resistors, operational amplifiers, and capacitors, the cenier frequency depends on a
number of element values, all t>f which must be varied simultaneously in the correct way

if the center frequency is to be adjusted directly. This is generally difficult and cumber-
some in comparison with building a filter whose characteristics art fixed. An alternative

to directly varying the filter churacteriEtity is to ust a fixed frequency-sekcltve iiher anrl

326

The CoTitinuouS'Time Fourier Transform

Ctiap. 4

shift the spectrum of the signal appropriately, using the principles af siiLusoidal amplitude
modulation. For e\aittple, coniiider the system shoVin in Figure 4.26. Here, an input signal
x(j) is multiplied by the complex ejtponential signal e'*^'^. The resulting signal is then
passed through a iowpass filter with cutoff frequency ain, and the output is tuultiphed by
^-/4t,r Yhs spectra of the signals x{0Ýy(f). w(0. and /{T} are illustrated in Figure 4.27.

KOcI
Ideal lowpass
firter

JUJ.]

y(D

Mt)

<H>

1
-¨^

<Otfj

uu

w{t)
<^

^fC)

Figure 4,2b I rrpla mentation of a l^andpass filter usin^ ampliLude modula-
tion with a complex expcnentiai carrier

XUoj)

Frequercy response of , Ideal lowpass filter

-Utfl

Ui^

4l>c

W(ji^)

zii
Wo

-A

[-Wc - Wtj}

4 [-iMt^,

N.£(,)

Figure 4.27 Spectra of Ihe signals
in the system of Figure 4.2^.

Sec. 4.5

The .Multiplication Property

327

Specifically, from either the multiplication property or the frequency-shifting pnjperty it
= fdbws that the Fourier transform of yit) f^'^'xit) is

= = Vijo)}

- SCiii <ar) * X(Jti>)

X(j(<a - w^ )>*

so that Y(Jo}} equally -^(/w) shifted to the right by at^ and frequencies in Xij<a) near
m = Qj(^ have been shifted into the p^sband of the lowposs fihcT^ Similarly, the Fourier
transform of /(r) = e^'^MOis

so that the Fourier transform of W(7*j) is Fijw} shifted to the left by w^ , From Figure 4.27,
we observe that the overall systeixi of Figure 4,26 is equivalent to an ideal bandpass fil-
ter with center frequency -ufr and bandwidth 2fi£||, as illustrated in Figure 4.28. As the frequency Wt of tht i^omples. exponetttial oscillator is varied, the center frequency of the bandpass filter varies.

H(jm)

-'1

-2tHQ-

Figure 4,26 Qanopas^ fitter equiva-
lent of Rgure 4.26

In the syytem of Figure 4.26 with x{t) real, the signals yit), w{t)^ and /(f) are all
complex. If we retain only the real part of /(f)* the resulting spectrum is that shown in
Figure 4.29, and the equivalent bandpass filter passej; bands of frequencies centered around iij(. and -ta^^im indicated in Figure 4.30. Under certsun conditionfi, it is also possible to use sinusoidal rather than complex exponential moduJation to implement the system of the latter figure. Tbis is explored further in E^rohlem 4.4^.

z;lli^
L-2iitfl-J
H'K^)
1
2
1 1

Figure 4,29 Spectrum all (R^{f{t)}
associated witn FiQitre ^.26.
Figure 4.30 EqjivaJent bandpass
filter for (n*{f(I)} in Rgure A.2S.

328

The Continuous-Time Fourier Transform

Chap, A

4.6 TABLES OF FOURfER PROPERTIES AND OF BASJC FOURJER TRANSFORM PATRS

In the pret;edirg sections (ind in the probiems at the end of the chiipter, we have considered some of the important properties af the Fourier transform. Th*ise are summaiized in T^ble 4.1, in which we have also indicated the section of this chapter Ln which eacli prop-
erty has been discussed.
In Table 4.2, we have assembled a List of man^ of the basic and important Fourier trdnsform pairs. W'e will encounter many of these repeatedly as we apply the tools ot

TABLE 4.1 PROPERTIES OF THE FOURIER TRANSFORM

Section

Frofwrty

Aperiodic sigiuil

Fourier transform

43 1
43.2 4 3.&
43 3
4.3.5 4.3.5 4.4 4.5
434
4.3.4 4.3.6
4.3J
4.3.3 4.3.3
4.3.3

xit)
Mt)

LineanLy Time ShifEing Frequency Shifting CdnjUgntlOlt Time Rcyeraal
TiiTic and Fr-cqucncy
S-caling
Convolutiun
MultiplicjUun
DifTerentiatlan in T^me

axit) + byif) Mt iii\ e^'xi!)
y{t)
M-'}
xini)
xit)*ya)
x(f)y(t)
d

Xijo})
V(j^)

-- - -

-

-

ifXijay) * by{jiif')

f"^"'"A(>w> X{j{ti} - iito)\
Xi jt^)
X(-/w)

xijiMmjo^)
^1T jtiiX{if/}^

IntefTdtion
DLtTcr^ntLauoii in
Frequency

J x{t)dt
Txfji

Conjugate Symmetry
fur Rcil Sign3].<;

j:(r) rca]

Symmetry for Real and Even Sigjidls
Symmetry for Eleal artd Odd Sj^Q^U
Even-Odd Decompo-
bini>n for Rci] Sig'
nalft

r(j)real and even
x{/}rva^ aiidodd
xAt) = ^^-UUi} Uti)£al] j^At) = 6dUt)\ [x[t) reall

- X{j(if) + wX{fi}6{a})
jot
j^-xu.^

JC(jw) = A*( -jftj)

CHHV(>^>^=CH^yt ;c^)}

^ i Br^iXiJiit)}

-tfrFiiXC- jilt))

\XUt^\\ = X[-jwi\

= 't:X{j(i>) - aXi.-jtv}

X{Jttt] teal and even

Xijii/] puT^Iy imagiDiiry Am] odd

(R^iXiJiit)}
J^miXij^)^

4,5.7

Par^val'b Rcluliun for Aperiodic Signals

+

Sec. 4.6

TaWes of Fourier Properties and of Basic FoLrier Transform Pairs

329

TABLE 4.2 BASIC FOURItB TRANSFORM PAIRS

S^nal
y. ^^^' ^Ahpl

FwirkT Cnnsfonn

4?^

^ 2jr

- ^k^itii koffi}

Ik

Fovrier series coefflckats (ITpcrlodH;)

^:<^i\'
cos {i}Qt

2irS{ir} - tOij) jrl&iiii - W(iJ +&i.u> +w^^]

= fii

1

^t =0,

othenvise

= fll

a

_1
otherwise

iiniiiot
^I> = 1

-- [5(to - Ufi\) -- 5(ftl 4 Wy)J
^trS(Qt)

= - fll ti* =0,

DCherwise

^ = = I,

ai

0. k f' G

/this ]i the ffluncT sene:^ [cpreRertatfon for^
lany cboiceof 7" > j

Periodic square wave

= ^tf)

U

y * \

^- \'\

-^

>.

7

o(w - jtwo)

sine

SinkiitnTt
kw

y ^(f - nD

j:(r:.
0,
.

> f|

T|

rr an)
i^tO
*Cr - io> *-%(;?, CR*{h}>0
>0 Je"^u(jr), CR*{tfJ
^--'"tO, tfl*{ci}>0

^ 2*^

JL^

T}

W < \ai\
^<£ W > = ^' 1^1
J

^-y£**ii
I
a f yw
1
(fl j^y

1

+ > <ff

/ftf

Y Ji =

for all k

--

-- -- --
--
--
--

--

330

The Continuous-Time FoLrier Transform

Chap 4

Founer analysis in t)ur examination of si^n^ls ajid systems. All of the tran.sform pairs, except for the lasi one in the lable^ have been considered in examples in the preceding sections. The last pair is considered in Problem 4,^0. In addition, note that several of
the signals in Table 4.2 ^^ periodic, and far these wt have also listed the corresponding
Fuurier series coefficienis.

4.7 SYSTEMS CKAfiACTERlZED BY LINEAR CONSTAMT-COEFFrCJENT OfFFERENTIAI. EQUATIONS
As we have discussed on several occasions, a particularly important and useful class
of contmuousj-time LTI systems is those for which the input and output satisfy a linear cotistani-coefficjent differential equation of the form

k-.l)

= J(-

In this secticsn, we consider the question of deienniningthe frequency resptin-ie of such an LTI system- Throughout the discussion we will always assume that the system is stable,
so thai itN frequency response exists.
There are twj closely related ways in which to deiemiine the frequency response Hijdi} for iin LTl system described by the differential equation (4.72). The fin^t of these, which relies on the facL that complex expi>nential signals are eigen functions of LTI sysvtems, was used in Section 3.10 in our analysis of several simple, nonideal filters.
Specifically* ]f j;CO ^ e^^', then the output must be y(/) ^ //(yojW*^ Sub.stitu ting these
expressions into the differential equation (4.72) and performing some algebra, wc can then solve foi Hija)), In this section we use an aliemative approach to arrive at the same UTiswer, making use of the differentiation property, eq. (4.31), of Fourier transforms.
Consider an LTT system characterized by eq. (4.72). From the convolution property,

orequivalently,

TM. wo*.) =

(4.731

where X{ja>), Yijtii], and H{jto} are the Fourier transforms of the input xit), output >-</) and impulse response h{t), respectively. Next, consider applying the Fourier transform to
both sides of i^q. (4.72) to obtain

^*i.^a1

\ Jf_ ^*r,>\1

(4.74)

Fmm the linearity property, eq (4.26)£ this becomes
^
k

(4,75)

Sec. ^.1

Systems Characlenzed by Linear Constant-CoetliciBnt DltterenlJal Equations

and fTt>jri th^ differentiaiit^n property, eq. (4,30£
Vf

331

t)r equivalcnVly,

n£ X(£ fj 5^ "tUt*>)* =

M
Vi>jtlja>)*

|:-0

J

-0 ft

Thus, from eq (4. 73),

¨(£ - n^^) XOtu)

^r-fii^(.Of' v.v
-o^ivUtor
'k

t4.76)

Observe that Hijcj) is thus a rational function; that i*?, it is a ratio of poJynoimals

in \jui}. The coefticients of the numeratoT polynomial are the same coefficients as those

that appear on the right-hanti $ide of eq. (4.72), and the coefficients of the denommiitOT

poiynomia]

are

the

same

Èroef]ltcient& as appear

on

the left

^ide

of eq.

72 (4.

J.

Hence,

the

frequency response given in eq. <4.76l for the LTI system characterized by eq. (4.72) can

be \writlen down directly by inspection
^ The differential equation (4.72) is commonly referred \o an Mh-otder differen-

tial equation, as the equation involves derivatives of the output y{t) up through the A^th

derivative. Also, the denominator of N(J(o) in e<i. (4,76) is an Mh-order polynomial in
(£.

Example 4.24
Cvnsijer a stable LTI sy^tejm eharacteri?^ by the differential equation

(4 77)

with (1 > 0. From eq. <4.76). tht frequency response is

~-^ /J(J^) = J<a + a

(4.78)

CoiTipajing this with the result of Example 4,1, we see that eq. (4.78) i^* the Fftyner
rraasform oft "^¨<J). The impulse re.sponse of the system is then recot^ni^ed as

Example 4.25
Consider a stable LTI system that is eharacterizBd by the differential equation

dfi

dt

dt

332

Tlie Continuous-Time Fourier Transform

Cfiap. 4

From eq_ (4.76)^ the frequency respflfflst is

To detcTTTiinc tht corre^jponding impulse response^ wc require the inverse Founerlransfonti of Hijm) This can he found using the technique of partial-fraction ex^pansion em-
m ployuJ in Example 4J9 and discussed detail in the appendix. (In particular, se^ Ex-
ample: A..h in which the details of the calculations for the paTtial-fraction expansion of
eq. (4.79) are worked out,) As a first step, we factor the denoininatcr of the right-hand
side of eq, (4-79') inic£ a product of lower order tenns:

Then, using the method of pajtial -fraction expansion, we find that

mj'^) = ^ Jbt -\- ]

juf -\-3

The inverse transform ot each term can he recognized tix'mÈxaiDpLe4.24H v^ith therespjit
that

The procedure used in Example 4,25 to obtain the invearse Fourier transform is gen-
erally useful in inverting transfonns that are ratios of polynotnials in /w. It^ particular,
we can use eq. (4.76) to determine the frequency response of any LTI system described by a linear constant-coefficient differential equation and dwn can calculaie the impulse response by perforniing a partial-fraction expansion that puts the frequency response into a form in which the itiverse transform of each term can be recognized by inspection. In
addition, if the Fourier transform Xijtu) of the input to such a system is also a ratio of
polynomials in j(t>, then so is Vijo)) -- H(jii))X{jw). In this case we can use the same
-- technique to solve the differential equation that is, to find the response y{t) to the input
x{s)^ This is illustrated in the next example.

Example 4.26

Consider the system of Example 4.25, and suppose that the input is

= xit)

e 'u{t).

Then, using etj. (4.80) ^ we have
-- row) = //(/ff)Xt>) = It^ ^^\7 -

-i\ lf^^-

yw +2
0+ mjbt +3)

(4.S1J

Sec. 4.8 Summary

333

A^ discussed in the appendix, in this case the parti al-fraction expapsion takes the form

*heu:^ii, A-\i,^^d A^\ are coiistanisto be determined. In Example A.2 in the appertdix, the letfinique of partial-fracUon eKpansioii i¨: u^ed to detcrmiiie tiiesc constants. The
va]u¨t£ flhtained are

All = ^. A,. = -, A^, = --.

so^hat

i
4

+ jirf

1

1

I

J

5

._

3

(jd? + Ir i<^ + 3

Again, the inverse Fourier transform for each term in eq. (4.S3J gan be obtained by in-
m spectLop. The first and third terms are t>f the &aitie type ^ihat we have encountered the
preceding t*o examples, while the inverse transform of Ihe second term can be obtained
from Table 4.2 or, as wa^ doneln EjLimple 4,19, by applying the dual of the differtEvti-
+ ation property, aSh given in eq. (4,40), to l/(jiu 1). The inverse transform of eq. (4.S3)
is then found to be

^r>^[i,^^^,,^-^,-^] iiity

From the preceding examples, we see how the techniques of Fourier aralysis allow
us to reduce problems concerning LTl systems characterized by differetwial equations to straightforward algebraic problems. This important fact is illustrated further iti a number ofthe problems at the end of the chapter. In additioin {see Chapter 6)> the algebraic structure of the rational transforms eticountered in dealing with LTI systems described by differenua\ equations greatly facilitate the analysis of dieir frequency-domain properties and the development of insights into both the time-domaiti and frequency-domain characteristics
of this important class of systems.

4.8 SUMMARY
In this chapter, we have developed the Fourier transform representation f-ar continous-tttne sigtials and have exanuoed many of the properties that mal[È this transform so useful. In particular, by viewing an apeiiodLc signal as the limit <^f a periodic signal as the period becomes arbitrarily large^ we derived the Fourier transform lepresentation for aperiodic
signals from the Fourier series representation for periodic signals developed in Chapter 3. Tn addition, periodic signals themselves can be represented using Fourier transforms consisting of trains of impulses located at the harmonic frequencies of the periodic signal and with areas proportional to the correspoDding Fourier series coefficients.
The Fourier transform possesses a wide variety of importajit properties that describe how different characteristics of signals are reflected in their transforms, and in

)

354

The Continuous-Tline Fourier Trarisform

Chap. 4

this chapter wc have derived and examined many of these properties. Among them are
two thiit have particular .significance for our study of signai;^ and systems. The first is the convolution propeit>, which is a direct consequence of ihe etgenfunciion property of complex exponential signals and i^ich leads to the description of an LTI system in terms
of its frequency response. This description plays a fundamental role in the frequency-
domain approach to the analysis of LTI systems^ which we will continue to explore in subsequent chapters. The second property of the Fourier transfomn that has extremely
important implications is the multiplication property, which provides the basis for the
frequency-domain analysis of sampling and modulation systems. We examine these syj^-
tems further in Chapters 7 and S.
We have also seen that the tools of Fourier analysis are particularly well suited to
the examin^don of LTT systems characterized by linear constant-coefficient differential equations. Specifically, v^e have found that the frequency response for such a system can be determined by inspection and that the technique of partial- fraction expansion can then he used to facilitate the calculation of the impulse response of the system. In subsequent
chapters, wc will find that the convenient algebraic structure of the frequency responses
of these systems allows us to gain considerable insight into their characteristics in both the time and frequency domain s.

Chapter 4 Problems
The first section tif problems belongs to the basic categ^ny and the answers are provided in the back of the book. The remaining three sections contain problems belonging to the basic, advanced, and extension categories^ respectively.

BASIC PROBLEMS WITH ANSWERS

4£1. Use the: Fourier transform analysis ecjuatlon (4.9) to calculate the Fourier transforms

of:

(a) f -2f^-J£H(f- 1)

(b>

2\!-l\

Sketch and label the magnitude of each Fourier transform.

4.2, Use the Fourier transform analysis equation (4.9) to calculate the Fourier transforms

of:
(a) dit + l)+ dU - 1)

^M-2 (b)

- r) + wj - 2)}

Skecch and label the magnitude of each Fouher transform.

4.3, Determine the Fourier transform of each of the following periMlic signals:

+ (a) &mi2frt f )

(b) 1 + cos<6ir; + f

4.4* Use the Fourier transform synthesis equation (4,8) to determine the inverse F^mrier

transforms of:
- (a) X](yw) = 2ir 6{a>) -^- TT S{uf 47r) + tt 5(to + Air)

Chap. 4 Probfems

33S

[

2,

(b) XAJo,) = {-Z

[

0,

0^ at ^ 1
-2 ^ <^ < > 2 |et^|

4^, Use the Fourier transform .synthesis equation (4.8) to determine the inverse Fourier
- Mm^fotm of )i(Jot) |;ifrjw)|^J*^fJ*'\ where

- + |Jf(yw)J

2{H(4t> 3) - u{ut - 3)},

= ~-w <X(jtl})

3
-\- IT.

Use your answer to determine the values of r fw which a(0 = Or

4-6£ Given that x(i} has the Fourier transform X(J(ii), express the Fourier transforms of
the signals listed bebw in terms of X^Jtu ). You may find useful the Fourier transforiT

properties listed in Table 4.1.

(a) xj(rj - j:(l-t>+ x{-l-t)

- (b) X2{t]

x[3i - e)

xM (c)

- ^.^.t-V)

4*7. For each of the following Fourier transforms, use Fourier transform properties (Table
4. 1) to determine whether the corresponding time-domain signal is (i) real, ima^nary,
Qf neither and (ii) even, odd> or neitheir. Do this vtithoat evaluating the inverse of any
of tiie given transforms.
- (a) X^ijtu) = u{bi) - u(pi 2] (b) X2iM) =cosC2i^)sin(|) (c) X3(ju) ^ Aitii)e^^*^\ where A{vj) = {sinlajytn and fl(w) = 2a^ + ^
(d) XU^) = Z^=-J{}^'^S(u, -^)

4Jt. Consider the signal

(¨) Use the differentiation and integration properties in Table 4 J and the Fourier
transform pair for the rectangular pulse tn Table 4.2 to find a closed-form e;tpressLon for X{Jm).
(b) What is the Fourier transform of gU) - x{t) - |?
A 4 Consider the signal
{a) With the help of Tables 4. 1 and A.2, deternjine the closed-form expression for Xijtoy
(b) Take the real part of your answer to part (a), and verify that it is the Fourier transform of the even part of xit\
(c) What is the Fourier transform of the odd part of j(f)?

336

The Continuojs-Tlme Fourier Transform

Chap. 4

4.10> (h) Use Tables 4.1 and 4.2 to help determine the Fourier tiansfonn of the following
signal:
/'sin A"

(b) Uite Parseval's relation and the result of the previous pan to determine the nu-
merical value of
^=1 rr^^\dt
ir-f-s-'j
4*11. Given the relationships y(0 = jc(r)*A(n
and
g(t) = xOr)*hOr),
and given d:iat jic(/) has Fourier transform X{J(a)) and h(t) has Fourier transtorm H{ju)\ use Fourier transform properties to show that ^(0 ha^ the form
giO = Ay(Bt). Determine the values of A and B.
4,12. Consider the Fourier transform pair

+ 1

U)'

(a) Use the appropriate Fourier transform properties to find the Fourier transfuim

offf-ll

^m (b) Use the result

part (a), along with the duahtY propertyt to determine the

Fourier trans fonn of

4f

Hint: See Example 4,13,

4*13* Let jr(f) be a signal whose Fourier transform is

= Xijot)

Sip>) + S(0J - tt) + S(6> " 5),

and let

- hit)

u{t) - u{t ~ 2).

(a) Is x(t) peno<lic7
(b) Is xiO * h{t) periodic?
(c) Can the convolution of two aperit^dic signals be periodic?

.

Chap, A Problems

337

4.14. Consider a signal xiO wiLh Fourier transform Xijo)). Suppose we are given the
foilowing facts:
1 xU) IS real and nonnegative
2. 3^~"((1 +- jw>X (;<(>)} = AÈ"^'m(0. where j^ is independent of/,

Decermine a closed-form expression for x{t).
4<15* Let -xCO tse a signal with Fourier transform K{jti>). Suppose we are given die fol-
lowing facts:
1, j(f) ts real_
2. xix) = Ofor/ =; 0.

Determine a closed-form expfes'>ion for Mt).

4.1<p. Consider the signal

" sin(jtf ) ^

tc

(a) l>etermlne;j(0 such that

.(0=1^/1.0).

{b> Use ihc TnultiplicalioTi property of the Fourier transform to argue that Kijui^ is periodic. Specify ^(ju) over one period.

4£17. Determine whether each ;)f the following statements is true or false. Justify your
answers,
(a) All odd and imsiginar)' signal always has an odd and imaginary Fourier trans-
fonn.
(b) The convolution of an odd Fourier traftfiform with an even Fourier transform is
always odd

4.18, Find the impulse response of a system with the frequency response

---- -- nijoi) =

(sin- (3^)) cos w

'

s

4.19* Consider a causal LTI system with frequency response

Jill -H 3
For a particular input x{t) this system is observed to produce the output

Detsmiine xit).
4,2a Find the impulse response of the causal LTl system represented by the RLC circuit considered in Problem 3.20. Do this by taking ihc inverse Fourier transfoirn of the circuit's frequency response. You may use Tables 4,1 and 4.2 to help evaluate the
inverse Fourier transform.

1

338

The ContinuQUS'Time Fourier TFin$fornn

Chap. A

BASIC PROBLEMS

421. Compute the Fourier transform of each of the fotlowLng signals:

> (a) [e''^' cofiiitotMt), or

(b) ^-^''Jsiii2f

^ (c) Jcit)

1 -f cos TTt,
0,

\t\ r^ 1
M>1

(d> Z:=^a'Sa-kTX |a|<l

(g) ;t(r) as shown in Figure P4 .2 1(a)

0,

othenvi^

^) ;f(f) as shown in Figure P4,2 1(b) (i) x::..^-"-'

x(t)

-2 -1

1D^

1

2t

h-1

h -1 1 1 1

it't i f 1 1 1

-6-5-4-3-2-10 1 2 3 4 5 6 T B I

(a)

(t))

Figure P4.21 4J2* Determine the continuouii-tinte signal corresponding to eacK of the following
ti-ansforms.

|x 0^)1
1

<XQb.J

-1

^

in

-3¨

(a)

C-)

^:va -3 -2 -1

12 3^

*b1

Figure P4,2Z

Chap. 4 Problems

339

(a) X(j<o) = ^^^=!^^^ - (b) Xijoi) cos(4fl> -l-fl-/3)
(c) X{ju>) as given by the magwtudc and phase plot* of Figure P4 .22(a)
- + + (d) X:{j(a) = 2[^<^ - \\ - 6((o + \)\ 3[6((d lir) S{w -t- 2ir)]
<e) Jt(jtt>) as in Figure P4,22(b)

4,23, Ct>nsider the signal

jfo(ri

^ ^ ?

1

elsewhere

Determine the Fourier transform of each of the signals shown in Figure P4.23. You should be able to do this by eApUcitly evaluating only the transform of x^it) and
then using properties of the Fotirier tf^nsform.

1

1

(3)
J^tt+1)

^2^

^-1
-*c(-t)

1

t

(b)

:<4a)

tJtoOJ

Figure P4.23
4*24* (a) Detennine which, if any, of the real signals depicted in Figurc P4.24 h^ve Fourier transforms that satisfy each of the following conditions:
(1) ^^{Xijw)} =
(2) ^MXiM)} =
(3> There exists a real or such that e^'^^Xijoj) is real .
<4) \:^Xij{ii)dio = {5) (_\wXOw>tfw ^
{6) Jt(y(u) is periodic
(b) Construct a signal that has properties (1)> C4)> and (5) and does not have the
others.

340

The Contmuous-Tlme Fou rier Transform

Chap. 4

t)

:^ t^ 2

t

Flgurr P4.24

Chai>. 4 Problems

341

4.25. Let X(Jiii) denote the Fourier transform of the signal x{t) depicted in Figure P4.25. (al Find <X(7w), (b) FindXijO).
id] Evaluate J_"^ X(j{o}^^^eJ^ d<o.
<e> Evaluate \^^\X{j<o)\^ dot. (f) Sketch the inverse Fourier transform of (R*{X(/^w)}-
Note: You should perform all these calculations without explicitly evaluating Jtlyw).

-1

1

t Figure P4.25

4.26. <a) Compute the convolution of each of the following pairs of signals xfj) and hit)
by calculating X^w) and ii{j<f>\ using the eonvolution property, and inverse

transfortning.

(i) Kit) = ti'-^'uit), hU) = e-'^'uit)

= = (ii> x{t)

re-''u{tl hit)

te-'^'u(t)

(ill) Mt) = e'^uitX hit) = e'u(-t)

(b) Suppose that j:G') = i?"*^"^ u(f- 2) and /i(0 is aj; depicted in Figure P4 26 Ver-

ify the convolution property for this pair of signals by showing that the Fourier
transform of y(/) = jc(t) * h{t} equals H{jo>}X(ju>).

h(t)

-1

3

1 Flgui^ P4,26

4.27* Consider the signals
XU) = u(t - V)- 2i^t - 2) + w'j - 3}
and

342

Tho Continuous-Time Fourier Transform

Chap. ^

> 'Adhere T Or l-et ot denote the Fourier series coefficients of xit), and let X{jftf\
denote the Fourier transform of xij),
(£) Detennine a closed-fomt expression for Xijay).
(b> Determine an expressionfor the Fourier coefficients ay and verify that o; =

4.ZS. (£) Let x(t) have the Fourier transform Xijta), and let p(i) be periodic with fundamental ircquency ui^ and Fourier series representation

= X p{t)

^' tj"*^'.)'

Determine an exp(ression for the Fourier transform of

y(t) = i(f)p(t).

(P4.2S-1;

(b) Suppose that Xijat) is as depicted in Figure P4 .28(a). Sketch the specmim of

y(i) in eq. (P4.2S-1) for each of the following choices of pis):

= (i> Pit) cos(t/2)

(il) pit) = co$/

= (ill) pit)

cos2i

= (iv) pit} (sin 0( sin 20

(v) pit) = cos 2f - cos t

(vl) p(t] =x^:...Ht-^n)

(vii> M0-i::r-.S(/-2^tt)

(viii) pit) = i:;r_5(/-4iT¨>

(x) pit) = the periodic square wave shown in Figure P4.28(b).

AX(|<u)

1

1

ti

pW

-3t -2ii

1 ff
(t£)

Ll 2fr

4tt

5iT

F^re P4.2S

Cftap, 4 PnobJenns

343

4.29* A real-valued continuous-time functjon \{t) has a Fourier transform Xijiti) whose
magnitude and phase ate aa iUufitriited in Figure P4.29(a), The functions Jt^O), ^^^(0, ^c(t), and x^U) have Fourier transfarms whose
magnitudes are identicaJ to X[jti>\ but whose phase functions differ, as shown in Figut^<: P4.29((>He)- The phase functions <Xaijt^) and <Xh{]i^) are formed by adding a linear phase to 4.X{}ti}). The function -^XAJt**) is foimed by re fleecing <X{juf) about ti> = i), and <Xj(jttf) is obtained by a combination of a refieclion and an addition of a linear phase. Using the properties of Fourier transforms, determine the expressions for XaitX ^f^(0^ J^At\ and xjit) in terms of x{t).

p^M

^X Qut

< Xg [lot)
^^ Tl/2

W
Slope = -fl Figure P4.29

j44

The Conitinuous-Tlnie Fourier Transform

Chap A

Slcp¨ =b
it/2

{di

<x d ii^>)
T7/2

^ ^ ^-^^^^^-^

Z---' lope

^^-^ '/^

Ml

^^_^ --^12

fe]

F^igure P4.29 Conttfm&d

4.30, Suppose È(/) = jc(/)ct5s f and the Fourier trarisform of the g{t) is
0, otherwise (a> Determine xit).
(b) Specify the Fouiier transform X\(j{i>)oia. signal x (f) such that i ^(r) - jli(/)<^os|-/

Chap. 4 problems
4.3L (a) Show that the three LT! systems with impulse responses hi(t) = u(tX

345

and
h^U) = 2te~'uU)
= all have the same response lo jt(0 cosf.
(b> Find the impu](:e response of another LTI system with the same response lo cos^ Tliis prcblem illustrates the fact that the response to cas* t cannot be used to
specify an LTI system uniquely. 4.32. Consider an LTI system S with impulse response
... sin<4</-l))
Determine the output of .S for each of the following inputs:
(a) JfiCO = cosC6f+ f) (b) ^liO = Zr^{>(|)*sin(3A0
(c, ,M = ^^^^
4.33. The input and the output of a caa^ LTI system are related by the differential equa-
tion

(a) Find the impulse response of this system,
(b) What i& the response of this system if j:(t) = ^f^^'u(f)?
<c) Repeat part (a) for the causal LTI system described by the equation
4.34. A t^ausal and stable LTI system S has the frequency response
6 " w^ + 5jci>

.

346

The CofltiE>LOUS-Tlme Fourier Transform

Chap. A

(a> Deteimiii& a different equation relating th& input x{f) and output y{t) of 5. (b> Determine the impulse response h{t) q{S.
(c) Whdt is the output ofS when the input is

4.3S, In this problem, wc provide examples of th& effects of nomliiiear changea in phase
(a) Consider the cotitiniKiiis-tiine LT[ system with frequency response
a -\- j<a
where a > 0. What is the magnitude of Hijcj)? What is <HUw)? What is the
in^ulse response of iMs system?
= (b) È>etermine the output of the system of pan (s.) with a I when the input i&
cos(f/V3> + cost + cos Jitr
Roughly sketch both the input and the output.
4^. Consider an LTF system whose response to the input x(0 = [e-' + ^ ^'Mt)
is

(a) Find the frequency response of this system. (b) E>etennine the system's impulse lesponse. (c) Find the differentia] equation relating the input and the output of thi$ syst<;m.

ADVANCED PROBLEMS

437* Consider the signal xit) in Figure ?4.37. itt) Find the Fourier transform X(iw> of xiiY (fa) Sketch the signal

= 2L ~ xit]

Xit) *

^t' '^^>'

jt--¨,

(c> Fittd another signal git) such that g{t) is not the same as x(t) and

xit) - git)* 2L B(^-4t)-
i=--:

Chap.^ Problems

347

(d) AT^ue that, although G(;w) is different from X(y¨),G(j^) = X(>^)fora]l
integers i. You should not explicitly evaluate G{j<a) to answer this question.

x(t)

+1

Ffgufe P4,37

438. Let x(t) be any sigiul with Fourier transform X(Jit>). The frequency-shift property
of the Fourier transform may be stated as

(a> Prove the frequency-shift property hy applying the frequency shift to the analysis equation
;rOw) = [ xiOe'^'^'dt.
(b) Prove the frequency- shift property by utilizing the Fourier transform of e^*'^ in
conjunctic)n wilh the multiplication property of the Fourier transform.
4.39. Suppose that a signal x(s)has Fourier t^ansform^(y^u), Now consider another signal
^(0 whoae *ihape i& the same as the shape of Xija/); that is,
git) = xijty (o> Shoft' that the Fouriei transform G{jtii} of ^t) ha^the&ajT>e shape a^ -- 2iTxi fy,
that is, show that

(b) Using the fact that

in conjunction with the result from part (a), show that

4.40. Use properties of the Fourier transform to show by induction that tfie Fourier bunsform of

xit} =

^""'M(r), a>Q,

(¨-!)!

34S

The Continuous -Time Fourier Transform

Cliap. A

I
{a + Jtay 4AI. In thi s problem, we deri ve the multiplication property of the continuous-time Fourier
transform. Let x(t) and y(i) be tw;i t:ontinuous-tiine signals with Fourier transforms ^(;w) and l'(/<^^), respectively. Also, let g(t) denote the inverse Fourier transform
(a) Show that

^ ^(0 I

^f XiJO)

Yijiw - 6))^^"^' dio dO.

(b) Shov^ that

^I

Y{J{i^ - i}})e^^'diii = e'^^'yuy

(c) Combine the results of pait^ (a) and (b) to conclude that j?(r) - xiryyirX

4.42, Lee

g^U) = {[cos(woO]40} * MO

and

gAt) = {[sin{toyynixit)} * h{tl

where

is a real-valued periodic signal and hit) i.s the impulse response of a stable LTl
system.
(a) Specify a value for wp arid iiny necessary constraints on Hijw) to ensure that

g^U) - {R*{fl5}

and

Ï2(0 ^ ^^05}-

(b) Give an esampl& of h{i) such that JË(j¨j) satisfies the constraints you specified
in part (a). 4.43, Let

Assuming that x{t) is real and X(/w) ^ LTF sy.stem S such that

2

sin f

771

^ U for |cli1

show that there exists an

-^ ;t(i)

g{t\

Chap. 4 Problems

349

4.44, The output >(r) of a causal LTI system is r&lated to the input j(0 b)' the equaiicm

dy{t) + 10y(/) =
di

xiT)zit -T)dT- x{tX

where z{T\ = e"^u(0 + 3S(J)(a> Find the frequency response HO'w) ^ Y(j{ti)/X{Jot} of thin system.
(b) Determine the impulse response of the system.
4£45. In the di^cu^si^n in Section 4.3.7 of Parseval's relatiou for continuous -time signals,
we saw that

^j xitfdl =
I

\X(jta)fdai.

This says that the tot^ energy of the signal can be obtained by integrating lX(yw)P

Now over all frequencies.

consider a rcal-va]ued signal x{t) processed by the ideal

bandpass filtcir H{j(ii) shown in Figure P4.45. Express the energy in the output sig-

nal y(Oas an integration over frequency of |X(ja*)p. For A sufficiently small so that

|Y(jcl£)| is approximately constant over a fr^uency interval of width i, show that

the energy in the output yU) of the bandpass filter is approximately pn)portional to

On the basis of the foregoing result, A,A^(jtuy)p ia proportional to the energy in the signal in -^ bandwidth A around the frequency op^ . For this reaion^ \X{jtii )p is
often referred to as the energy-density spectrum of the signal x{t).

H{y4

x(D

^ H(M

-Hih^

1 --
n

n

Figure P4,45

4.4*. In Section 4,5, U we discussed the use of amplitude modulation with a complex
exponential carrier to implement a bandpass filter. T^e specific system was shown in Fignre 4.26, and if only che real part of f{t) is retained, the equivalent bandpass fiher i."* that shown in Figure 4.30.
In Figure P4.46, we indicate an implementation of a bandpass filter using sinusoidal modulation and lowpass filters. Show that the output v(0 of the sys-
tem is identical to that which would be obtained by retaining only CR*^(/(r)} in Fig-
ure 4,26.

SBO
x(t)

coe<jJr,t

The Continuous-Time Fourier Transfotm

Chap. 4

QtQ

tl>

F^ure P4.46

447, An important property of the frequency response Bijat) of a continuous-time LTI
system with a real causal impulse response h{r) is that H(j<o) is completely specifted by its real part, (R^HiJtif)]. The cument problem is coticemed with deriving
and e?LaminiTig some of the inr^pUcations of this property, which is generally referred
to as real-pan sujyiciency.
(a) Prove the property of real-part sufficiency by examining the signal fte(r), which
is the even part of ^(0- What is the Fourier transform of /ic</)? Indicate how
h(t) can be recovered from h^it). (b) If the real part t>f the frequency response of a causal system is

what is MO?
(c) Show that h{r} can be recovered from htiU)* the odd part of h(t\ for every
value of t except t = 0. Note that if h{0 does not contain any singularities
[d{tl u\0). ii2(t], etc.] at r = 0, theti the frequency response

HiJat)

= =1.

hiOe-^'^'dt

will not change it hit) is set to some aibitrdry finite value at the single point
= r 0, Thus, it^ this case, &ht>w that H{jta^ is also completely specified by its
imaginary part.

Chap. 4 Problerr.s

SSi

EXTENSION PROBLEMS

4.48, L^t us consider a system with a real and ciiusal impul&e response h{r) that does not
have any singularities at r = 0. In E^oblem 4.47, we saw that either the real or the imaginary part of Mijat) completely determines Hijtit). Jn this problem we derive
an explicit relaiionshjp between /fff^w) and Mi{j<o\ the real and imaginary parts

(a) To begin, note that since h{t) is causal,

hiO = hit)u(tX

(P44S-1)

= except perhaps at / 0. Now, since h{t) contains no singulatiLieN at/ = 0, the
Fourier transforms of both sides of eq (P4.48^1) must be identical. Use this fact, together with the multiplication property^ to show thai

-- T H(Jf^)

^

JTT j

,,

^SM^n.
w - -q

(P4,48^2)

Use cq. (P4.48-2) to detertnine an expression for Hnijw) in terms oi Ilfijw} and one tot Hj(j(ii) in terms of //^(/iii),
(b) The operation

--^dT >'(0 = -If*" x{t) ,

CP4.48-3)

IS called the tiiibert transform. 'We have just seen that the real and imaginary parts of the transform of a reaJ, causal impulse response hit) can be deterttiined from one another using the Hilbert transform.
Now L:onsider eq. {P4.48--3), and regard y<0 as the output of an LTI system
with input xit). .Show that the frequency response of this system is

={? Ui i \

I

> J' a£

= (c) What is the Hilbert transfonn of the signal x{t)

cos 3f?

4*49. Let Hijoi ) be the frequency response of a coDtinuous-ti me LTJ sys tem , and su ppose
that Hijw) is red, even, and positive. Also, assume thai

(a) Show that:
(i) The impulse response, ft(r), is real. <ii> ms^{\hU)\] = /r(0).
Him: If /(f, Èc>) is a complex function of two variables, then

^ fit,tj)dii>

\ffXti))\dfu.

352

The Continuous'Time Fourier Transform

Chap. A

(b) One important concept in system analysis is the bandwidth of an LTI system. There are numy different mathematical ways in which to define bandwidth,

but they are related to the qualitative and intuitive idea that a system with fre-

quency response G(/w) essentially "stops" signals of the form e-**^* for vaJues of

itf where G(^Jifi) vanishes or is small and "passes" those complex exponent! aJ'^

in the band of frequency where G< J tu) IS not smalL The widd:i of this band is the bandwidth. These ideas will be made mueh clearer in Chapter 6, but for ro^iv we

will consider a special definition of bandwidth for those syf^tems with frequency

Tespon^es that have the pr^jperties specified previously for H[j<o). Specifically,

unc definition of the bandwidth B^. cif such a system is the width of the rect-

angle of height Af < jO) that has an area equEvl to the area under f/(jt>). This is

^ illustrated in Figure P4.49(a>. Note that sifnce HijO) = max^ Mijw}, the fre-

quencies within the band indicated in

figure are those f^ir which Hiju^\ h

largest. The esact choice of the width in the figure is, of course, a bit arbitrary,
but we have chosen one definition that allows us to compare different systems

and to make precise a very important relationship between time and frequency What is the bandwidth of the system with frequency response

/fOJ =

W < \iO I
> W IojI

Area cri rectangie = area under H(}4u}
Figure P4.49a
(c) Find an expression for the bandwidth B^, in teims'of Hi jot).
(d) Let sit) denote the step response of the system set out in part (a). An important
measure of the speed of response of a system is the ri.se time, which, lite the
bandwidth, has a qualitative definition, leading to many possible mathematicaJ definitions, one of which we will use. Intuidveiy, the rise time of a system is a measure wf how fast the step response rises from ^ero to its final value,
j(K^= Ums(0
ThuKj the smaller the rise time, the faster is the response of the system. For the
system under consideration in this problem, we will define the ri.se time '^
U^

Chap, A Protoiems

353

Since
s\0 = hUl
and also becau^ of the property that hiO) = maXf h{t), fr is the time it would take to go from zero to s(w) while maintaining the maximum rate of change of
sit). This is illustrated in Figure P4.49(b). Find an expresston for tr in terms of Hijio).

Figure P4.49b

(e) Combine the results of parts (c) and (d) to show that

B^.tr ^ 2tr.

{P4.49-1)

Thus> we cannoi independently specify both tha rise time and the bandwidth of our system. For example, eq. (P4 .49- 1} implies that, if we want a fast system {tr
small), the system must have a large bandwidth. This is afundtunental trade-off
that is of central importance in many problems of system design.
4^. In Problems 1.45 and 2.67, we defined and examined several of the properties and
uses of correlation futictions. In the current problem, we examine [he properties of f:uch functions in the frequency domain. Lei jc(r) and y{t) be two real signals. Then
tha cross-correlation function of jc(0 and y<r) is defined as

0^y(r) =
J

x{t^ T)y(T)dT.

Similarly, we can define 4*yAt}y fpzxU}, and <pyyit}. [The last two of these are called
the autocorrelation functions of the signals x(t) and yit}, respectively ] Lei 4* jy(/aj), ^yx(j<^)t *jfj{yw>t and i>yyijot} denote the Fourier transfocms of iff^yiO, (^vi(f), tffxi{t\ and ^j^^(/)> respectively.
(a) What is the relationship between <l'j(^(jw) and 4'yj{jw)? (b) Find an expression for ^xyijf^} in term* of ^(/w) and Y(j<iiy (c) Show that ^^^((jw) is real and normegative for every at. id) Suppose now that x(t) is the input to an LTl system with a real-valued impulse
response and with frequency response Hijtjj) and that yit) is the output. Find expressions for ^zyijta) and ^yy{jat) m. terms of ^^Ajot) and ff<yw).

354

The Continuous-Time Fourref T'ansform

Chap. 4

,(e^ Let i(r) be a? is Utustrai&d in Figure P4.50, and let the LTI system impuli^ie
= > response be /i(f) e~"^u{t), a 0. Compute 4>,,(yii>J, ^tviy<^)i ^""^^vJy")
Tismg ibe results of parts (a>-(d)-
lO Suppose that we are given the following Fourier transfonn of a function <M0:

- .,

<t>^-f- 100
at ^ + 25"

Findd^eiiTipube responses of fkvoi:atisal£ siable^LTl sjistems that have aulotor-
relation functions cqLial to ^(0 Whichoneof these has a causal, stable inverse''

Figure P4*50
4.51. (fl) Consider twt) l.Tl systems with impulse responses h{t} and s(t), respccLively. and suppose that these systems are i n verses t>f one another. Suppose also that the systems have frequency responses denoted by Hijia) and G{jii)), re.spectively.
What is the relaiii^nsiiip beVwecn /J(jn>) and G{jfi>)l
(b) Consider the t;wniinuous-time LTl system with frequency response
[ 0, otherwise
(i) \s It possible to find an input x(0 to this system such that the outpui is as depicted in Figure P4.50? If so, find xU), If not, explain why not.
(ii> Is this system invenible? Explain your answer.
(c) Consider an auditorium with an echo problem. As discussed ui ProbJem 2,64,
we can model the acoustics of die auditorium as an LTJ syMem with an im-
pulse response consisting <}f an impulse train, with the ilh impulse in the train corresponding to the ^ih echo. Suppose that in this particular case the impulse response lÈ
where the factor e~^^ represents the aitennation of the *th echo.
In order to make a high-quality recording from the stage, the effect of the echoes must be removed by performing some processing of the Kotmds sensed by the recording equipment. In Problem 2.64. we used convoluLional techniques to consSider one example of the design of such a processor <for a different acoustic model). In the current problem* we will use frequency-domain techniques.
Specifically, let G(^to) denote the frequency response of the LTl system to be

Chap 4 ProbJems

3S5

used 10 pro^e^s the sensed acoij>tiÈ signal. Choo^ije Oijei}) so that the echocA are completely removed and the resulting sigt^al is a faithful reproduction of the origin^ stage sounds. (d) Find the differential equation for the invenje of the system i%ith impulse response
hit) = 25(0 + ¨i(r).
(e) Cynsider the LTl system initially at rest and described by the differential equa-
tion

The inverse of this system h al^ initially at rest and described by a differen-
tial equation. Flhd the differential equation describing the inverse^ and find the impulse responses h{i) and ;?{0 of the original system and its inverse.
4,52, Inverse systems frequently find application in problems involving imperfect measuring devices. For example, consider a device for measuring the temperature of a liquid. It is often reasonable to modeJ such a device as an LTJ system that^ because of the response characteristics of the measuring element (e.g., the mercury in a thermometer), does not respond instantaneonsly to temperature changes. In particular, assume that the response of this device to a unit step in temperature is

- jO> (1 - e-'^-}u{ih

(P4,52-0

<a) Design a compensatory system that, when provided with the output of the mea-
^ suring device, produces output equal to the instantaneous temperature of the
liquid,
(b) One (if the problems that oiten arfseii in using inverse systems '4S compensators
for measuring devices is that gross inaccuracies in the indicated temperahjre
may occxur if the actual output of the measuring device produces errors due to
small, erratic phenomena in the device. Since there always are such soiirces
of error in real systems, one must take them into account, lb illustrate this,
consider a measuring device whose overall output can be modeled as the sum
of the response of the measuring device characterized by eq. (P4.52-1) and an interfering ^'noise" signal n{t\ Such a model is depicted in Figure P4.52ta),
where we have also included the inverse system of part <a>, which ho\i/ has as its inpuT the i>veral} (Hitput of the measuring device. Suppose that nit) = sinnwr What is the contribution of n(0 to the output of the inverse system, and how does this output change as w is increased? (c) The issue raised in part (b) is an important one in many applicati^^ns of LTl system analysis. Specifically, we are confronted with the fundamental trade-
off between the speed of response of the system and the ability of the system
to attenuate high-frequency interference. In part (b) we saw that this tradeoff imphed that, by attempting to speed up the response of a treasuring device <by tneans iif an inverse system), we produced a system that would also amplify

356

The Contintfous-Time Fojrier Transform

Chap. 4

Actu^ n>ea$uring devK^

n{t)

LTi mcKlel of
measuring device 5(tJ - (l-e-^)u(t)

o

Perfect meaauring

device

^ s{t\

u{i)

{a)
X
_J

Inverse Eyslem to LTJ model of nwasyrng
devtce
Compensating system

Figure P4.S2

comipting sinusoidal signals. To iliustrate this concept further, consider 3. measuring device that responds instantaneously to changes in temperature, but that also is corrupted by noiiie. Tlie response of such a system can be modeled, as depicted in Figure P4.52<b>, asi the sum of the response of a perfect measuring
device and a corrupting signal n(ti Suppose that we wish to design a conipen-
satory system that will slow down the response to actual temperature variations,
but also will attenuate the noise n(T). Let the impulse respense of this system be

h(t) = ae ^'u(0-

Choose a so thai the overall system of Figure P4,52(b) responds as quickly as possible to a step change in ternperature, subject to the constraint that the
amplitude of the portion of the output due to the noise Mt) = sin 6r is no larger
than 1/4.

4.53- As meittioned in the text, the techniques of Ftmrier analysis can be extended to signals having two independent variables. As their one-diTnensjonal counterparts du in some applications, these techniques play an impertant role in other applications,

such as image processing. In this problem, we introduce some of the elementary

ideas of two-dimensional Fourier analysis.

Let x(ti. h) be a signal that depends upon two independent variables ,'] and

h. The two-dimensional Fourier tra?isform of xU], r^) is defined as

n X{j0iiji^2) =

j:(f].f3)e"^^'"'^^'^^''V/|^/n.

(a) Show that this double integral can be performed ay two successive one-
dimensiona] Fourier transforms, first in r\ with r^ regarded as fixed and then
in f?-

Chap, 4 ProWem$

3S7

-- (b) Use the result of part (a) to determme the inverse trEinsform that ifi, an expres-

sion fur a(/|, ti) in terms of X(j<f>\. /wz)-

(c) Deiemiine the two-dimensional Fourier transforms [>f the following signals:

(j> x{ti,i2)- e-'^^^'^u(ti -)M2-t2)

(ii) xOuh) =

e-f^'-l'-l, 0.

if-1 < h ^ land -1 ^ rj :s 1
otherwise

-\ r(1.1i1t\) ...a (/t,\.0^|q^"" "''''-

^ ^ ^ ^ if

/|

1 orO /2

I (or both)

otherwise

(iv) .t(/i^ ?:) as depicted in Figure P4.53.

(v) s"i'i "^"I'l "\

j<i,t^, t^) = 1 in shaded area

1

and cutside

-1
Figure P4,53

(d) Determine the ^^ignai 7.{i\> ti) whose two-dimensionaJ Fourier trdnsform is

iTT

= + H X(Jt^i, J(i}2)

4 yÈt(

<tf2

2^i)'

(e) Let x(t], t2) and h{ti, r^) be two signals with two-dimeosiondl Founer transforms Xijioi, jw2) and Hijm^, j^i\ respectively. Detennine the transforms of the following sign^ds in terms of X(jW|, JW2) and Hij(f>\, ji^^jy-
(i) xiu -Ti.t2- T2)
(ii) x<.atx.bi2)
(iU> y(t^,ti) = (_X"J_T Jf(^,7^)^(f| -Tut2-'r2)dTidT2

5
The discrete- time fourier
transform
ñ
^.* -aUll -^.^

5.0 fNTRODUCnON

358

In Chapter 4. we mtroduced the i^ontinuouj^-fime Fc-urier transform and deveJoped the
n;any charactensitics of that tmnsfomi which makfi the methods of Fourier analysis of
m atich great value analyzing and understanding the properties of continuous-time signals
^d systems. In the current chapter, we complete our development of the basic tools of
^ouner atialysis by introducing and examining the discrete-time Fourier transfonti

In our discussion of Fourier series in Chapter 3, we saw that there are many similari-

ties and strong parallels in analyzing continuous-tinM and discrete-time signals However

there
sme*

are also imp<Ktant differences. For example, as representation of a discrete-time periodic signal

we
is

saw in
ajmire

Secrion 3 6 the Fourier series, as opposed to the

infinite senes representation required for continue us -time periodic signals A^ we will see

in this chapter, there are coiresponding differences between continuous -time and discrete-

tune Fourier transforms.

In the remainder of the chapter we take advantage of the sioiilanties between
continuous-bme and discrete-ume Fourier analysis by following a strategy essemialK
idenucal to that used in Chapter 4. hi particular, we begin by extending the Fauner se
nes descnption of periodic signals in order to develop a Fourier transform representation
for discrete-time aperiodic signals, aiid wt follow with an analysis of the properties and
charactenstics of the discrete-time Fourier transform that parallels that given in ChatH
tor 4. By doing this, we not only will enhance our understanding *>f the bAsic concepts of homier analysis thai are common to both continuous and discrete time, but also will con-
trast their differences in order to deepen our understanding of the distinct characteristics
ot each.

,

Sec 5 1

Representation oTApenodic Signafs The DiscreteTime FourierTrarTsfofrrr

359

S. I REPRESENTATION OF APERIODJC SfGNALS: THE DISCRETE-TJME FOURIER TRANSFORM

5J T .

Development of the DJscret¨-TTme Foiirier Transform

Iti Seclion 4.1 [eq. (4.2) and Figure 4 2], we saw that the Fourier series coefficients for a

conljnuoijs-tijne periodic square wave can be viewed as samples of an envelope function

and that, as the penod of the square wave increa^ses, these samples besjoine nnore and

more finely spaced. This property suggested representing an aperiodic signal xU) by first

con^trucline a periodic signal ^(0 that equaled x{{) over one period. Then, as this period

approached infinity, x{t) was equal to xiO over larger and larger intervals of time, aiid the

Fourier series representiOion for xit) converged to the Fourier transform representation for

jc(/). In this section, we apply an analogous procedure to discrete-time signals in order to

develop the Fourier transform representation for discrete- time aperiodic sequences-

Consider a general sequence x[n] thatisof fimteduratitjn. That is, for some integers

= ^ A Af|and/V"2,4¨l

outside the range -A^] :^ n

A'^- signal of this type is illustrated

in Figure 5.1(a). From this aperiodic signal, we can construct a periodic sequence x[n] for

which x[n] is one period, as illustrated in Figure 5. 1(b). As we choose the period /V to be

larger, ^[n\ is idemit^al to x[n] over a longer interval, and as A^ -* £, x[r\] = x[n] for any

finite value of ^,

Let us now examine the Fourier series representation af x[nl Specifically, from eqs, (3.94) aod (3,95), we have

k .Ay

(5.1)

Kfnl

Mi
n
fa)
xln]

Ir

illliilllli

itiilllllli

(b)
Figune 5,1 (a) Finite-duration signal x[nY (h) peiodic signal x[ff] ccnstmcted to fae equal to x[f^] over one period.

3ÈD

The OiscreteTime Fourier Transiorm

Chap. 5

=
¨A

xln]e~^^^^''^^^".

A' n = (N>

(5,2)

^ ^ Since x[n] - x[n] over a. period that includes the interval -Ni

n

A^;;, it is

convenient i6 choose the intervd of summation Iq eq. (5.2) to include this interval, so th^

x[n\ can be replaced by x[n] in the summation. Therefore,

N^ S N^ Z = fl*

-w^-^^'^-'""" -

-w¨ -;taTrffl/Sn

n=-N,

(53)

where in the second equality in eq. (5.3) we have used the fact that x{n\ is zero outside
the interval -?^\ ^ n =^ N2. Defining thefunciion

21 Xie^'^) ^

x[n]È-''^".

we see that the coefScients d^ are proporticnaJ to samples ofXie^'^X i.e..

(5.4)

(5.5)

where wo = m 27r/N is the spacing of the samples the frequency domain. Combining eq$.
(5.1) and (5.5) yields

2 = 3t[n]

^X{e'^')e''^<'".

k=i.S)

{5.6)

= = Since tao Itt/^, orequivalently, 1/N wtjl'ir, eq. (5.6) can be rewritten as

2tt t = fWt

^ N ¨ As with eq. (4,7), as increases too decreases> and as

^+ eq, <5.7) pas&cs to

ail integral. To see this more cleurly, consider X(e^'^)e^'^" as sketched in Figure 5.2. From

X(e'">e^''

--J
2^

Figure S.2
of efl. (&.7).

Graptiical Inierpretation

,

Sac 6.1

Representation of Aperiodic SignaJs: TTie Discrete-Time Fourter Transfornn

361

^ eq, (5,4), XU^" ) is seen to be pmodic in to with period 2^^, and is ^^*'", Thus, the product
Xie^*^)e^" will alsc- l?e periodic. As depicted in the figure, each lerm in the sumniation in eq, (5 7) represents the area of a rectangle of heighr X{e'^¯)ef'^^" and width tu^. As
ttfo ~^ 0, the summation becomes an integral, Furtbennorc, since the summation is carried
out over jV consecutive intervals of width tt>c- ~ SttZ/V, the total interval of integration will always have a widtii of 2tt. Therefore, as jV -> £, x{h\ - x[n], and eq, (5.7) becomes
x[fi] = -L f X{^^)e''''"d<o,

Where, since X{e^'^)e^'^" is periodic with period Itr, the mterval of integration can be laken
as any interval of length lir. Thus, we have the following pair of equations:

I
x[n] =

X{e j^'jgj*^£ diO.

2tr] 2it

X(f^^) == >: x[n]e - jtan
n = --I

t5,8) {5.9)

Equations (58) and (5.9) are the discrete-time counterparts of eqs. <4.8) and (4.9). The function X^e^"^) is refened to as the discrete-rime Fourier transform and the pair of equations as the discrete-time Fourier transfbrmpair Equation (5.8) is the synthesis equa-
tion, eq. (5.9) the analysis equation. Our derivadon of these equations indicates how an
aperiodic sequence can Ik thought of as a linear combination of complex exponencials.
In particular, the synthesis equation is in effect a representation of x\_n\ as a linear combination of compJe)( exponentials ioiinitesimally cJose in frequency ajid with amplinjdes Xie^*^)idu}t2'TT\. For this reason, as in continuous time, the Fourier transform Jt(eJ") will often be referred to as the spectrum of i[nj. because it provides us with the infonnation
on how x[n\ is composed of complex exponentials at different frequencies.
Note also that, as in continuous bme. our derivation of die discrete-time Foiuier transform provides us with an important relationship between discrete-time Fourier scries and transforms. Tn particular, the Fourier coefficients ay of a periodic signal x{n\ can be expressed in terms of equalJy spaced samples of the Fourier transfomi of a finite-durabon, aperiodic signal x[rt] diat is equal to l[ri\ over one period and is zero otherwise. This fact
is of considerable importance in practical signal processing and Fourier analysis, and we
look at it further in Problem 5 .41
As our derivadon indicates, the discrete-time Fourier transform shares tnany similanties with the continuons-tinie case. The major differences between the two are die periodicity of the discrete-bme transform X(t:^*^) and die finite interval of integration in the synthesis equation. Both of these stem from a fact that we have notod -several bmes before: Discrete-time complex exponentials dial iliffer in frequency by a multiple of 27r ^ne identical. In Section 3.6 we saw diat, for periodic discrete-time signals, the implications of this statement are that the Fourier series coefficients are periodic and that the Fourier
series representadon is a finite sum. For aperiodic signals, the analogous implications are diat XieJ"^) is periodic (with period 277) and that the syndie&is equation involves an inte^ gration only over a frequency interval that produces distinct complex exponentials (i.e.,
any inter^-al of Icngdi 2ir). In Section L3.3> we noted one further consequence of the pe-

36Z

Ttie Discrete-Time Foiiner Transform

Chap. 5

=0 = fiodicity of c^"^" as a function of oj: w

and oj 2tt yield the same signaJ, Signals

at frequencies neoi these values or any other even multiple of -jt are slowly varying and

therefore are all appropriately thoiighi of as low- frequency signals. Similarly, the high
w frequencies in discrete time are the values of near odd multiples of tt. Thus, the signal

T [n] shown in Figure 53[^) v/ith Fourier transfomi depicted in Figure 5.3(b) varies more I
slowly than the signal X2.[ri] in Figure 5.3(c) whose transform is shown in Figure 5-3(d)-

n Jti

XWe^")

f^ *f*^tTT,T! LftT,g*T,.*
(a)

217
^:A^

** t 1 *, f *, 4 T4 *,1 I I.I .'i.T*.ñ>*."t*.',*.f

-2-n -IT

-n

2:

(c)

(d)

Figufv 5.3 (a) Discrete-time signal Xi[n]. (b) Fourier transform of /i[n].

w = Note that X\{e>'^) is concentrateti near

0, +2i7, i^u, .. (c) Discrete-

X2M time signal

fcf) Fourier transform of x^ln]. I^ote tha: Ji^t^^'j is concen-

= trated n&ar w

Itt, Ý3Tr, ....

5.1 .2 Examples of Discrete^Tlme Fourier Transforms
To illustrate the discrete-time Fourier ixansform, let us consider .several examples.

Example S. f
Consider the signal

= T[n\

o'^HlffJ,

< [fl|

1

See S 1

Representation of Aperiodic Signals: ^he Discrete -Tline FcurierTransfornri

Tn this casi!.

V X(*''"^ =

f^H rt"wfrtli

36B

^^

-- I1

a/Je^ J*u

The muj^nitufk and phase of Xie-^"^) are shown in Figure 5A\a) for d > and in Fig ^ ure ^.4(b> for a 0. Note thrall of ihcse funciions art periodic in tu ftiiti period 2ir.

ixie'^

--tan ^ (a;v{ -3^
{ai
iX^eJl

p^j^-lan 'daj^. 1 af^i

Figure 5.4 MaflritLde and phase of the Fourier transform of Example 5 1

> < lor (a) a

and (d) a

3¨4

The Discret^'Unne Fouriar Transform

Chap, S

Example 5.2

Let
This signal is sketched For from eq. (5.9);

x[n\ - o^^l

< \a\

I

< < a i in Figure 5.5(a). Tts Foixier transfonn ii obtained

^ X{e^n -

o'^l,

yiM/n

K,n]

..^tTTIT

Ii liltU-

{a)

X(En

Figure 5.5

= {a) Signal xln]

^'^01 Example S.2 and (b) Jt$ Fourier trans-

form (0< a< 1).

Sec. 5.1

Rfl prase nation of Aperkidic Signals: The Discrete-Time Founer Transform

B65

m Making Che substitution of variables = -jz tn the second sumpiation, we obtain

it^\}

i£-i

E[>th of these summations are inAnLte geometric series that we can evaluAte tn clpsed
forni. yieldnn^

1 - M~J^ 1 --aei^

1 -- 2acosa> + j^

< < In this case, XCc^" > is real aiwl is ill\£strated in Figure 5,5(b). again for

dI

Èxampre 5.3

Consider the rectingular pulse

> [0, |n| A^(
which is illustrated in Figure 5.6(a) for ^] =^ 2. In this case,

X X(fJ'") = C=-^fl

-ytffT

[5.10)
(5 UJ

^^1

N, Nt

ÈTf tJ

Figun S.6

= (a) flectanaular puise signal of Example 5,3 tor /Vi,

2 and

(b) its Fourier transiorm.

366

The Dtsc:BtB-Tlme Fourier Transform

Chap. 5

Using takulatioris similar to tho^ employed in cibtajning cq. (3.104) in Example J!.I2, wt can wnte

sin tt£ [A

\'
-I-

I

Tliii Founer tranhform is sketched inFigure 5.6fbi for^ = 2. TThe function jneq. (5.1 2j
li the discrete-time counterpart of the sine function^ which appears in the Fourier trans-
form of the ccrntinuou5-time rectanguiar pulstr (see Example 4,4>. An important differ-
ence between these two functions i"; that the function in tq, (5.12) is ptnodic with period Itt, whereas the smc function is apericHjit,

5.1 ,3 Convergence issues Associated with the Discrete*Tinte fourler Transform
AhhDugli the argutiiet^t we used [o derive the discrete-time Fourier iransfonTi in Section 5.1.1 was consHTjcted assutning that x[n\ was of arbitrary bat finite duratitia eqs. (5.S) and (5,9) remain vahd for an extremely broad class uf signals with infinite duratioti (such as the signals in Examples 5.1 and 5.2). In this case, however, we again must consider Lheqiief;tic>n of convergence of the infinite summation in the analysis equation (5.9) The conditions on x{n] that guarantee the convergence of this sum are direct CDunterparts
of the convergence conditions for the continuous-time Fourier transform.' Specificallyn eq, (5.9) will converge either if j:[rt] is absolutely sumtnable. that is.

V < i^|¨]|

=c,

(5 13)

or ]f the sequence has finite energy, that is,

2^ \x-nf- <x.

^5.14)

In contrail to the situation for the analysifi equation (5.9), there are generally no

ctmvei^ence issues associated with l;he synthesis equation (5.8), since the integral in this

equation is over a finite interval of integrauon. This is very much the same situation as

for the discrete-time Fourier series synthesis equation (3.94X which involves a finite sutn

and consequently has no issues of c<)nvergence associated with it either In partioular.

if we appi£ximate an aperiodic sigtial x\n\ by an integral tif complex exponctitials with

^ frecjueticies taken over the inter^aJ |ui|

H", i.e.,

x[fi]^ -1- r^ Jlf(^^''^)^-'^M^,

(5.15)

V 'FLicdisciisfcionBof ttic convergence iSiue^assucitticd with the Jiscrete-time Fourier tr^tisfnrm. s^e A. Oppenheim and R W. Schafer. DiscreieTlnte Signal Ptjx vssmH ^btXglcwjwJ Cliffii, MJ TVentlce- 1 1 &U, live ,
1^8!*), i\hdV>. R. E^bioerind B. CJold, Theory cnH Apphcatifm af Digital Ss^tutl Proc^'i-nri^ \.\Lt\.^\iivi:>iniC\if\s, NJ: PrenticC'Hall, Inc., ]^>75).

-

Sec. 5.2

The Fo¨ri&r Transfofm for Peiiodic SiQTials

B6T

W -- then x[ii]

x[n] fcNf

^ ir. Thus, much as in Figure 3, IS, we would espect not to see

sr.y behavior like tbe Gibbs phenometiOTi in evaluating the discrete -time Fourier trafisfonm

synthesis equation. This is jl]ustrate<l in the following example.

Example 5,4
Lt:t x[n] Ix: the unit impulK; that is, xin] = 6[n].

In tlus cass the analysis equation (5 9) ib easily evaluated, yielding

= X{e-f-^}

1.

In other words, just as in continufius time, the unit impulse has a Founer transform repre-
sentation consisting of equal totithbutions ^t all frequencies. If we then Jipply eq, {5.1^} to this example, we obtain

-- = amWn = jtln]

r^ 1

..,,,

,

e^'^^dfii

-^.

Ztt j n/

irn

(5.161

Thia is plotted in Figure 5.7 for several values of W". As can be seen, the frequency of the
m o^illations the approximation increases^ Wis increased, which is similar to wtiat we
observed ta the cdiitiftuous-tiuxe ca^s. Qti ihe other hand, in contrast to the continuous-
time case, the amplitude uf these oscillations decreases relative to the magnitude nf r(0]
W as is increa¨ied, and the oscillations disappear entirely for IV = tt.

5.2 THE FOURIER TRANSFORM FOR PERfODJC SfGNALS

As in the continuou^i-tiTne case, discrete-time periodic signals cati be incorporated wiihiti
the frainewort of the discrete-lime Fourier transform by interpreting the transform of a periodic signal as an impulse train in die frequency domain. To derive die form of diis representation, consider the signal

juln] - ^^'^'".

(S.17)

In continuous time, we saw that the Fourier tratisfoim] of e'^^^ can be interpreted as an impulse at td = cjuy. Therefore, we might expect die same type of transform to result for
tbe discvete-time signal of cq, (5. 17). However, the discrete-time Fourier transform must be periodic in tu with period 27r, This then suggests that the Fourier transform of .x[n\ in
J eq. (5 7) should have itnptilses at <t^^, atf^ = Itt, u^o Ý 4;r, and so on. Tn fact, the Fourier
transform of x[n] is the impulse train

*
4
K orKifi

PI
nl
5
rt)-*

LI
5

oˋ

^

T"

%
II
3
1^

?^^ Pi

-- M

¨
'

On¨ |]
_È

ir^ II

Ïi5:
n. J-- -w
f^ ^ ^
1A~
II
IL 43 CI

368

Sec 5.2

The Fourier Transform far Periodic Sigrials

369

which L^ illustrated in Figure 5,8, In order to check the validity of diis expression, we must evaluate its inverse transform. Substituting eq. (5J8)infto the synthesis equation (5,8), we
find that

l-rrl

- 3irÈ(w - Wo 2irl)e^'^" diit.

X{^
It,

(okq - 4tt)

- (*rt0 Sit)

(l£o + 2ii)

(^0 + +it)

Figun; 5-6 Fourier transform of

Note that any ititervai of length 27r includes exactly cme impulse in the summatioti ^iven
in cq. (5.18). Therefore, if the interval of integration chosen includes the impulse located
at i£o + I'nr, then

N Now consider a periodic sequence x[n] with period and with the Fourier series
representation

2^ ;[n] =

a^e jK2ir!mn

* = (A>

In this case, the Fourier transform is

(5.19)

Z Xien=^ SiT^^aL-^),

(5.20)

SO that the Fourier transform of a periodic signal can be directly constructed from its

Fourier ct>efficients.

To verify that eq, (5,20) is in fact correct, note that 4n] in eq, (5.19) is a bnear

combination of signals of the form in eq. (5.17), and tKus the Fourier tiansfomi of xln]

must be a linear combination of transforms of the form of e(i. (5 J 8), In panicular, suppose

we N that

= - choose the interval of summatioti in eq. (5, 19) as it 0, 1, ... ^

1 , so that

= ^[t]

^ aiy+ fl,f^t2^/^}¨ a^^miTrffi-^n

'' -\- aj^-^e ji.f^-i^llwf^)n

(5,31)

370

The Discr¨t&-l)me FouTier Trarvsform

Chap. S

Thus, jf[nj h a linear combination of signals^ as in eq, (5.17), with w^i -- 0,2^/N.

-- (A A-ir/lSf. .. .,

\)2'Tr!N. The resulting Fourier transfonn is illustrated in Figure 5.9.

IiT Figure 5.9(a), we have depicted the Fourier transform of ftie first term on the right-hand

= side of eq. (5.21): The Fourier iransfomi of the constant signal oo È1^^''"'^ is aperiodic

= impulse train, as in eq. (5. 18), with two

and a scaling of Z-Jrao on each of the impulses.

Moreover, from Chapter 4 we know that the Fourier series coefficients ci^ are periodic

with period N, so ihat liriiij = Itt^jv = 2iTa-s. In Figure 5.9(b) we have illustrated the

Fourier transform of the second term in eq. (5.21 ), where we have again used eq, (5, 1 8X

2713(1 - 2iËa ^

Eirao

iL

Zit

(-N + 1)2^ N

((-N-i)3s)

T

-- 2Ta ^irai^j -,

jg .

(a)
2irai
I
2ii
(t>)
(-1.)
T
2ira||-i ^ 2ita_|
(c)

2lr
((N.1)^)
(N -'^)
T
2113^

5Tia_,, ^ 2ira.M,n
11 T -Zt

1 2^^
i i1

2Tia,, SiraHnr
i1 T 2Tr

(<1^

Figure 5.9 Founer transform of a discrete^ime periodic sfgnal (a) Fourifir transform

of the first term on ttie right-hami side of eq. (5.21); (b) Fourier transform of the sec-

^ ond term in

(5 31): (c) Fourier transform trf the last term in eq. (5.21); (d) Founer

transform of x[n] in eq (5 21).

.

S£c. 5.2

TTie FounerTransfarmfar Penodic Signals

371

= Ln this case for ai^^'^'^''^'*", and the fact that l^ra^ = 2iTapi^\

277a-A/^i, Similarly,

Figure 5.9(c) depicts the finaJ term. Finally. Figure 5,9<d) depicLs the entire eJtpression

f(?r X(^-'*'). Note that because of the periodicity of the a^^Kie^^) can be interpreted as

a train of impulses occurring at multiples ofthe fundamental frequency lir/N, with the
= area of the inipul&e located at w lirk/S being ^ira^, which is exactly what is stated in

eq. (5.20).

Example 5,5
Consider the periodic signal
x[n] = cosfu^jn = + ^e^'^^'' i^--'"*'^

--2lT
with wu =

(5.225

Frcmei^. (5.18), we can ImmediateLy write
^ ^ = Jt(e^"J ttsL -^-iTT^U Y^ttsL+ -1h\

(5.23)

That ii.
^ Xie^) = fl-S|a.- ^WitbL+ I,

-- ^ < TT

Èi>

IT,

(5.24)

and X(tf'^) repeats periiKJically witha pericwiof 2ir, as illustrated in Figure 5, 1 0.

X(e^

ill

-2Tr

-- IeJ^]

tOQ

air

(-2'ir-wg) (-2'rr+ti:cil

Frgtire 5.1

= 0ist;rete-tim6 Fourier transform at j^I^J cos toon

Example 5>6

The discrete-time counterpart of ths pentwlic impulse train of Ejtampk 4.8 is the se-
quence

T xln) -=

S[n- kNl

*= rt

(5.23J

as sketched in Figure 5 1 1 (a). The Fourier s¨nes coefiicienLs for this signal can be cal-
culated directly from eq <3,95):

372

Ttie Discr&te-Time Founer Tran&form

Chap. 5

asO^H^jV-- Choosing the interval of ^hUmmation

I, we have

1

(5.26)

U&ing t:qSr {5.26) and (5.20), we can then represent the Fourier transform of ihe signal
as

0,27)

which is iUustrated in Figure 5 \ 1(b).

5c[n]

I

1

1

N

2U

{^)

i .

ib

JL

J

1

T*T

^ *- 2tt

(l>

Figure 5,1 1
transform.

(a) Discrete-tjme periodic impulse train, (b] its RHjrIer

5,3 PROPERTIES OF THE DISCRETE-TIME FOURIER TRANSFORM
As ivilh the continuous-time Fourier transform, a variety of properties of the discrete-time
Fourier transform provide further insight into the transform and, in addition, are often useful in reducing the cotnpJexity in the evaluation of tiansfomris aitd inverse transforms.
In this and the following two sections we consider these properties, and in Table 5. 1 we present a. concise sumEnary of them. By comparing this table with Table 4.1, we can
get a clear picture of some of the similarities and differences between cont]nuous4lme
and discietc-time Fourier transform properties. When ihc derivation or interpretation of
a discrete-time Fourier transform property is essentially identical to its cotjtinuous-time
counterpart, we will simpiy state the property. Alsq, because of the close relationship between the Fourier series and the Fourier transform, many of the transform properties

Sec. 5-3

Properties of the Discrete-Time Fourier Trairstorm

373

tranaJate directly into corresponding properties tbr the discrete-time Fourier series, which
we summarized iti Table 3,2 and btiefly discussed in Section 3.7.
In the following discussions, it will be convenient to adopt notation similiir Lo that used in Section 4.3 la indicate the pairing of a signal and its transform. That is.

5,3. 1 Periodicity of the DJxcrete-Trme Fourier TVansform
As we discussed in Section 5. 1, the discrete-timt Fourier transform is always periodic in
ti> wi(h period 2jr; i.e..

X(e>*-*2'>) = Xie'^l

(5.2S)

This is in contrast to the continuoua-time Fourier transform, which in genera] i^ not peri-
odic*

5-3.2 Linearity of the Fourier Transform
If

xi[n] ^^Xi(f>)
and

then

^2[¨] ^^-^ K2{en,

-- + ^xdft] + hx^in] * > flXiCc>'^) bX2{^'^).

(5.29)

5.3,3 Time Shifting and Frequency Shifting
If
-- x[n\ * * Xie^"^),
then
An - -- ¨ol * ^ e'^'^'^'Xie^*^)

^5.30)

37* and

The D Is crate-Time Founer Transform

Chap. 5

,!<^nri
x\f(\

xu ;(cu-wn)
Y

a^i)

Equation (5.30) can be obtained by dirtcr substitution of x\ri - n(j] into the analysis equation (5,^), whiie eq, (5.31) is derived by sxibstituting A'(^^'^^~'^¯^) into tht synthesis equa-
tinn(5.S).
As a consequence of the periodidty and frequency-shifting properties of the discretetime Fourier tranafomi, there exists a special relationship between ideal lowpass and ideal
higtipaiss discrete-time filters. This is illustrated i.n the next example.

ExampJe 5.7

In Fi|;ijTe 5. 1 2 fa) we liitve depicted the frequency response //|p.(f-"^) of a Igwpass filter
-- with futoft frequency lif^, while in Figure 5.12(b) we ha^e displayed H\^{e>^'^'~'"^) that
is. tiie frequen-cy response H\yX^^'} s.hiftedby one-half period, !.¨,, by tt, Sintt high frequencies in diiicrete time are concentrated near ir (and other odd njuUiplcs of it)> the filt&r in Figure 5.12(b) is an ideal highpasf; filter with tuiofT fre^juenf/ ir - to^. That is.

= //,pCf^)

f/iptf^'^- -').

(5 32)

As we can see from eq. (3.l22f, and as we will discuss again in Section 5.4, the
frequency response of an LTl system is the Fourier transforjm of the impuiw response
of the system. Thus> if h\^[n\ and /ih^ \n] respectively denote the impulse re*potises of

cn
-2tj

H|p(en
jm
2ir
fa)
HJ^"^ -)

~~!

^1

1

M1

1
1
TT

(tt- (uJ

{ll-wj

fb)
Figure S. > 2 (a) Frequency response ot a lowpass firtej-; (b) frequency re-
sponse at a hl^hpass fiftsr obtaino^ hy shifting the frequency response in (a) by b> =^ IT corresponding to one-half period.

Sec. 5.3

Propertiej cf the Discrete-Tini& Fourjsr Transform

375

Figure 5.12, eq. (5.32) and the frcqtiency-hhifting property imply thit
the bwpasi and highpas-s filters in
= ^-lrvl¨].

(5.33) (5.34)

5,3.4 Conjugation and Conjugate Symmetry
If

then

^[/i] H^- ^(f^-X

^^[fl] *-- X^*'-^).

(5.35)

Also, if x\n] is real valued, its transform X{e^'^) is conjugate symmetric. That is,

= X(^''^) :*f*(f^^^) [j:[/ijreal].

(5.36)

From this, it follows that iReiXie^*^)] is an even function of ci} and SmiXie^'"]} is an odd function of fj. Similarly, the magnitude of A;(f^'^)is anevenftincdon and the pha.se angle is an odd function. Furthermore.
M^lrt]} *-^ (SieiXie^"")}
and
Od{x[n]} ^^^ y^m{X(e^")K
where Èv and fief denote the even and odd parts, respectively, of jf[??l. For example, if a[¨J is real and even, its Fourier traTisform is also real and even. Example 5.2 illustrates this
symmetry for x[n] = a^"^.

5.3.5 Differencing and Accumufcition
In this subseclion, we consider the discrete-time counterpart of integration^ that is,
aceiimulation--and its inverse, first differencing. Let j;[n] he a signal with FoLrier trans-
form V Jf(*r^" Then, from the linearity and time- shifting properties, the Fourier transfonn
pair for the first-difTerence signal Jf[nl-jf[n-l]is given by

-- -- x\n]

.T[fl

1]

(1 - e->)Jf(f^^).

(5.37)

376

The DiscTflt^Time Fourier Transform

Ctiap. 5

Next, consider the signal

15.38)
Since y[/i] -- y[n -- I] = x[n]. we might conclude that the transfortn of y[n] ^houl^l be
-- related to the transform of x[fi\ by division by (1 e'J'^). This is partly correct, but as
with the continuous" time integration property given by eq. (4.32), there is more involved.
Ttie precise relationship is
1-^
(5.39)

The impulse train on the right-hand side of eq. (5^3?) reflects the dc or average value that

^m can resuit

stunmation.

Example 5.8

Let us derive the Founer transfom Xi^e^} of the unit step x[n] = if[n] by making us*

of the accumulation property and the bio^vledge that

M = gin]

&[ti^

CU^-) = 1.

From Section 1.4.1 we know that the unit step is the nmning sum of the tinit impulse.
That is,

ft

Taking the Fourier transfomi of both sides and using accumulation yields

T ^^^'"^ = /I

^ ,.. <^(^'"> + TTOte^^)

6(^ - 27Tit)

1

+ 7r

" 2^ 1

ff-J"

- 5(ft> 27rJt).

it=-=

5.3.6 Time Reversal

Let x\_n\ be a signal with spectmrn Xie^*^), and consider the transform K(e^^) of >'inl = jc[-fl], Fromcq. (5.9),

1-^

n -- --^

= fl

- Le

(5,40)

Substituting wi = - n into eq. (5.40), we obtain

^5.41)

--

Sec. &.3

Properties erf the [Jiscrete-Tirne Fourier Transform

377

That is.

x\-n\

Xie-^l

(5.42)

5,3.7 Time Expansion
Because of Che discrete nature of the time indeA for discrete- time signals, the reJatioo be-
tween ti me and frequericy sc^li ng in discrete time takes on a somewtiat different form from its continuous-lime t;ounterpart. Specifically, in Section 4.3.5 we derived the continuous-
time property

xiat)^f-,X\^\.

(5.43)

However, if we try to define the signal x[an]^ we njn into difficulties if a is not an integer.
< Therefore, we cannat slow down the signal by chousing a 1 , On the other hand, if we
-- -- let u be an integer other than Ý1 for example, if we consider x[2Ti\ we do not merely
speed up the original $ign3l. That is, since n can take on only integer values, the signaJ jf[2nj consists of the even samples of ,r[n] alone.
There is a result that does closely parallel eq. (5.43), however. Let ^ be a positive integer, and define the signal

^(oM -

Jt[n/A], 0.

if n is a i^uUiple of k if n is not a multiple of k.

(5.44)

= % As illustrated in Figure 5. 13 for *

^ik^[n\ is obtained from -cfnjby placing Jt - 1 iieros

bet\veen succes^iive values of the original signal. Intuitively, we can think of J<jt>[nl as a

slowed-down version of x{n]* Since rr(j^>[nl equals unless n is a multiple of Jt, i.e., unless
= n rk, we see that the Fourier transfonn of Jf(;.j[nj is given by

1

1

1

*
.*

1

-?fc}' 2

a

-1 1

-
1
1

1

1

-- -- ' *- -t-*- -ñ^- **-'6¨-£3

1 *05t"J
[
1
*

-4-^

3

6

'

1

*

-ñ-ñ-

1
-ñ-

Figure 5.1 3 The si^naj yi^)[n] ob
tained from x\r\ i>y insertinfl two 2eros
^ between successive values the
original signal.

378

The OiKcrete-Time Fourier Transform

Ch^. 5

= Furthermore, since Xdjlr^l x[r]^ we find thai

ITiat is.

f = -- ^o

^aUn] ^-^ X(f -'^X

(5.45)

Note that as the signal is spread out and slowed down in time by taking t > 1,
its Fourier transfonn is compiessed. For example, since Xie^^) is periodic with period 217, Xie^*^) is pet^odic with period lir/t This property is illustrated in Figure 5.14 for a
rectangular pulse.

nl

If 4 *f1

W"]

)(52^(eh-X(el^

Kc3£[nl

t

1

)(c!,(el^-X(^^

Figure 5.14 Inverse relationship between the time and frequency domains' As J^ in-
creases, i([),)\n] spreads out while its transform is compressed.

Sec. 5.3

Properties of the Discrete-Time Fauri&r TraDSform

379

ExampJe 5.9

m As

illu&tmtLOn of the usefulness, of the tLm^exp^siou property in determining;

Fourier tiansfomis^ let us consider ttie sequence x{n] displayed in Figure 5.15(d^. This

sequence can be related to the simpler sequence y[r{} depicted in. Figure 5-15(b). In

particular

= + - x[n\ yi2y[n] 2yi2)[n IJ,

where

^^^'^"^~|a

if ¨ is odd

and Xijilfi " IJ represents y(2,{n} shifted one unit to the rigJn. The signals j'j2>[iij and 2>(2)rn - 1] are depicted in Figures 5, 15(c) and (d), respectively.
Ncxt£ note that >[¨] = ;c[n -2], where j^^n] is a rectangular pulse as cDnsidercd
in Example 5-3 fwith N^ = 2) and as depicted in Figure 5.6(a). Consequently, from
Example 5.3 and the tirne-shifting property, we see that

sin(ci£/2)

2t

£

x[ni

inn 01 2345I 6il7819

m {a) y|nj
, 1012341 56789

'1
01.

ym\n]

23456789 1 . 1 , r , I
(Cj
t

Èy¨[n-i]

01 33456769 ~* "^

Figure 5.15 <a) The signal x[n] iti Exaniph 5,9: (b) Ihe &£gnal y[n], (c)

^ha signal y4S)[/)J obtainod try ins¨rtina ofk zero between successive values of

a^ y[Ti\,

jd) the ^grai 2^2) [rt - iy

--

3B0

The OiMrete-Tiine Fourier Transform

Chap, 5

lining the ume-c^ip'ansjon property^ we then obtain

y(2>[n]

-- -- ^ ^j4^ siiK5w)

^^

:
Z

Tj

sta.{(tf)

and using the lineanl^ and time-shifting properties, we get

CombinLnf the^ two re^uLts, we have

5.3.8 Differentiation in Fiequency
Again, let

If we use th¨ definitiot) of X(f-^") in tbe analysis equation (5.9) at^ differentiate both ^ides, we obtain

^ =

-jn;c[n]È"^'"^

The right-hand side of Uiis equation is the Fourier tiansfortn of -- jrtx\ji\, Thet^ore, multiplying both sides by j^ we see that

(5,46)
The usefuhiess of this property will be illustrated in Example 5.13 in Sectioti 5.4.
5. J.9 Parseval's Refatton
If x[n] and X{eJ" ) are a F&urier tratisform pair, then

(5.47)
We note that this is similar to eq. (4.43), and the derivation proceeds in a similar man-
net. The quantity on the left-hand i:ide of eq. [5.47) is the total energy in the signal jc[tj], and

S¨c. 5.3

Properties of the Discrete-Time Courier Tra/isform

381

c^ Parse v^'s relation states that thi^ energy

also be determined by integfating th? energy

per unit frequency, [X(^^")p/2fr, -overa full Itt interval of distinct discrete-tJFne frequen-

cies. In analogy with the continuous-time cast, \X(e^*^)p is refemed to as the energy-density

spertrutn of the signal x[n]. Not^ also ^at ¨q. (5.47) is the counteipart for ^jeriodic sig-

nals of Parseva]*s relationi eq, (3.110), for periodic signals, which equates the average

pov^er in a periodic signal w^th tbe sum of the av^r^e powers of its individual hantionic

components.

Given th¨ Fourier tran^fbrm of a sequence, iX is possible to use Fourier transform

properties to detennine whether a particular sequence has a number of different properties.
To illustrate this idea^ we ^esent the following example*

Example 5.10

^ Consider the sequence j[nj wtKise Fourier cransfonn Xie^"^} i* depicted for -ir

^ We fjj

n- in Figure 5. 16.

wish to detenniite whether or not, in the time dom^n, xin]

IS periodic, real, even, and/or of ftoite energy.

3'
X
(a)

(b)
Figure 5. 1 6 Magfiitude snd phise of the Fourt¨r transform for Earn-
p1& 5.10.

332

The Oiscrete-Tlme Founar Transform

Chap a

m Accordinglyn we note first that peiiodtcUy the lime domain implies ihai the

Fourier trinsform is zero, except p<^ssibly for impulses located at various integer multi-

We ples of the fundamental frequency. This h not true foi X(^'*).

conclude, then, that

j[[n] is n{/t pericpdic.

Ntjit, from the syminelTy properties for Fourier transfonns, we kiinw that a real-

valued sequence ttiust have a Fourier transform of eveji magnitude and a pha^e function

k We that odd. This is true for the given \X(e-'")\ and <Xie^'-').

thu.=i conclude tHat x[n}

it, leaL

^vm Third, if x[ n\ is an

ftitwtion, tlien . by the sjimiietr> picypenies fpt r^l iignals,

JTffi'f'*) mnst be real

ajid even. However, since X(^'"")

=

^^ \X(eJ'^)\e-

, Xie^"^) \s noX a

real'valued function. Consequently, x[n] is not even.

wc Finally, to test for the finite-energy propeity^

ntay use Pari^val's relation.

It is clear from Figuie 5.16 that integratirig |A'{fJ")j^ from -tt to tt will yield a finite

We quantity.

conclude that x[n\ has finite energy.

In the next fev^' sections, we consider several additional properties. The first two of these
are the convolution and multiplication properties, similar tii those discussed iti Sections
4 + and4.5. The third is the property of duality, which is examined in Section 5.7, where we cotiEider not only duality in the discrete-lime domain, but also the duality that exists
herween the cDntinuous-time and discrete-time domains.

5.4 THE CONVOLUnON PROPERTY
Tn Section 4,4, we discussed the importance of the contintjoui-time Founer transform with
regard to its eiTeci on the operation of convolution and its use in dealing with continuous-
time LTl systems. An identical relation applies in discrete time, and this i^ one r>f the
pnncipd reasons that the discrete-time Fotuier transfonti is of such great value in representing and analyjzJTig discrete-time LTI .systems. Specifically, if jr[jil, A[n], and >(ril are the input, in^uise response, and output, respectively, of an LTl sy.stem, so that
y[n] - \[n] * h[rjl
then

Yie^'') = Xie^'^iHie^'^X

l5,4S>

where Xie^'^lH{e^'^), and K(^^^) aie the Fourier transf4>mis of :*[¨], h[n], and \[nl re-
spectively. Furthermore, comparing eqs. (3.122) and (5.9), we see thai the frequency re-
sponse of a discrete-time LTI system, as first definedin Section 3.8, is the Fourier transform of the impulse response of the system.
The derivation of eq. (5.48) exactly parallels that carried oui in Section 4 4. fn particular, as in continuous time, the Fourier synthesis equation (5.S£ for jc[ii] can be inter-

Sec. S.4

The Convolution Property

393

p^ete^<i dj^ a decompOiiition of x[n] into a Linear combination of complex exponentials with
^ infinitesima] amplitudes proportional u> X(È^*^}. Each of these exponentials is eigen-
function of the system. In Chapter 3, we used this fact to show that the Fourier ^erie^
coefficients of the respond of an LTI system to a periodic inpot are simply tbe Fourier coefficients of the input multiplied by the system'*! frequency response evaluated at the cotre&potiding harmonic frajuencies. The convolution property (5h43) represents the extension of this result to dperiodk Lnpots and outputs by using tbe Fourier transform rather
than the Fourier series.
As in continuous time, eq. (5.48) maps the convolution of two signals to the simple
algebraic operation of multiplying their Fourier transforms, a fact that both faciUtate^ the analysis of signals and system!* and adds significantly to our understanding of the waiy in which an LTT system responds to the input signals that are applied to it. In particular, from
eq. (5.48), we see that the frequency response Hie^*^) captures the change in conplex
amplitude of the Fourier transform of the input at each frequency w. Thus, tn frequency-
^ selective filtering, for example, we want i/(c^") 1 over the range of frequencies L-orrespondlng to the desired passband and H{ef'^) ^ over the band of frequencies to be
eliminated or signiticantly attenuated.

5.4. T ExampJes
To illustrate the convolution property, along with a number of other properties, we consider
several examples in this section.

Example 5. 11

Consider &d LTI sy&tcm with impulse response

= A[n]

- a[r> no].

Tbe ^equeDcy response iÝv

m^n ^Hn- =

Bol^ - Jt.^^

-t-J-WflV}

Thus, for any input x[n] with Fourier transfomi X(,e^\ the Fourier transform of the
output is

We - note that, for this example, y[n] = x[n fl[>] and eq. (5.49) is consistent with the
time-shifting property. Note also that the frequency response W(e^*) -^ e -'"'"(^ of a pure time shift has unity magnitude at alL frequencies aiid a phase characteristic -ittruj that is linear with frequency.
Example 5.12
Consider the discrete-time ideal lowpass filter introduced in Section 3.9,2. This system has tbe ftcqueticy response Hie^") illusurated in Figure 5.17(a). Since the impulse

384

The Discrete-rime Fourier Transfonn

Ctiap, 5

response and frequency response of an LTl system are a Fouiier transform pair, w¨ can

determine the impulse i^sponse of the ideal lowpass filter from the frequeiKy response

^ ^ using the Fourier tiatisfoiTD synthesis equation (5.S)r In particulai^ming -TT a

tt

as Uie interval of inte^ation in ttiat eqiiadon* we see firom Figurt 5.l7Ca) that

1

f4.'4:

^E *'"j -

ff(^-"">e^''(/w =

sinAJ^n

'dia

(5.50)

which IS shown in Figure 5.17(b).

n
-2v

1

Wo

on,

c Stt

m
AT
figure 5.17 (a) Freqwncy response of a discrete-time Ideal lowpass filter;
{b) impuls response of the ideal lowp>ass fjlter.
In Figure 5.17, we come across many of the same issues that surfaced with the continuous- titne ideal lowpass filler in Example 4. IS. Firsts since h[n] is not zero for
< fl 0, the ideal lowpass filter is not causal. Second, even if causality is not an importam is-
sue, there are other reasons, including ease of unpletJientation and preferable time domain characteristics, that nonideal filters are generally used to perfbim frequency-selective filtering. In particular, the impulse response of the ideal lowpass filter in Figure 5Al(h) is oscillatoiy^ a characteristic that is undesirable in &ome applications. Itijuch cases, a tradeoff between frequency-domain objectives such as frequciticy selectivity and time-domain
properties such as nonoscillatery behavior must be made. In Chairter 6, we will discuss
these and related ideas in more detail. As the following example illustrates, the convolution property can also be of value
in facilitating \ht calculation of convolution sums.

S¨c. 5.4

The Convolution Property

Example 5.13

Consider -An LTIisystem with impulse response
h[n] ^ a^uin],

< with 1^1 1, and suppose tKat the inpJl to ihis sysusm is

- x[rt\

j3"w[ftl.

wiih iff <^ 1. Evaluating the Fourier inmsfomns ofh[n] and x[n\, we have

I

I

and
so thai

\ - ae f^
T^^- ^f''"! =

38S
(^52>

As with Example 4,19. dctertn i tiing the I n verse iransforrti of YU^'^ ) i s most easily done by expanding Yie^) bj the mtlhod of panvai ftactions, SpecitkiUy, Yie-''^^ is a
ratio of poLynnmlals Ln powers of e~^, aixl we would like to expirees this a& a sum of siinpLer terms of this type so that wc c^n fiiid the inverse transform of each tcnn by
inspection (together^ perhaps, with the use of the frequency differentiation property of Section 5.3.R). The general algebraic pmceduie for rational transforms is described in
¨ the appetKliJ(. For ihi* example^ if ?* ^, tile partial fi^-tion cKpansmn of y{e^) is of
the fcnn
Equating the right-band sides of eqs (5.53) and {5M\ we find that

Therefore, fromEjiampLeS J and the Lnearity property, we can obtaid the inverse trans-
form of eq. (5.54) by inspection-

,t,,l=--.e^aMi.l-^r¨[nl

'^ ^

* '^

[(t''^'u[n]-p''^'u[n]].
a-fi

{5.55)

For ^ = j8, the paitial-fractiori e:tpanaLoJi iti eq. (5,54) is not valid. However, in this

1 -ate'^"

4

J8&

which cati be exprcsised as

Th& Discrete-Time Faufler Transform

Chap 5

a

dw

\\

-- <xe

^^ J

A-s in Example 4 19, we can use the frequency difierentiati on property, eq. (5.461,
together with the Fourier transform pair

J

1

I -a^ '"

to conclude that

dai\] - ae J"

To account for tJie fiictar c ^"'^ we use the time-shifting prop^^ny to obtain

^ ^ {n + \)a''^^u[rt + LI

j> '^

I

^^

\

and finaJl)', accounting for the fsictoi Utx, in eq. (5.56). we obtain

y[n\ = (fi + l)a'^u[n + ]]

(5.57)

h is worth noting that, although th& right-hand side is^ mulliplied by -4 step that begins
= at rt --K the sequence (n + })a"u{tt + = I] is still zero prior to n 0, since the factor -- fl -H 1 is ^ero at n - 1 Thus, we can altemutively express \[ri] as

y[n] ^ {n+ l)a'uinl

(5.58)

As ilJastrated in the next example, the convoluCton property, along with other Fourier
transform properties, is ofteti useful in analyzing system inierconttections

Example 5. 1

Consider the 5ystcjn shown id Figure :5. 18(a) with input ;r[/ij and output y[n]. The LTF

sys^tems with frequency rtapon&e ///^f^-"") are ideal lowpstss fillers with cutoff frequency jtM ukJ ontty gaia in the passhand.

Let u^ first cotisider the top path in Figjne 5.1 8<a). The Fourier transform flf the

= signal vi[nj can be obtained by noting thtt (-1)''

eJ"" so that v\\fi\ = ^'"^jrln].

Using, the frequency- shifting property, we then obtain

The convolution proporty yields

Since wiinj = e^^''W2[til we can agam apply rhe frequency-shifting property lo obtain

Sec. 5.^

me Convolution Property

387

{a)
1

it If

i

4

^\

Figure 5-16 (a) System interconne[:1ion for Example 5.14; {^) the overall
frequency response tor this system.

Since discrete-time Fourict transforms are always j^eriodic with period 2Tr.

Applying the convolution property to the lower path, we get

From the Linearity property of the Fourier tr^nsfonnH we obtain

Consequently^ the averall system in Figure 5 I8{a) tias the frequency response
which is shown in Figure 5.18(b),
As we sa* in Example 5.1, Htpie^^"^'"^) is the frequeticy response of an ideal
Tiighpai>s tAlter. Thus, the cverall system parses both law aiMl high ftequenciei and stop^ frequencies tKiween these two ptuabaiKls. That is, the filter has what isofEen referred to
< as an ideal bandsiop characteristic, wliere tbe stopband is the refif^n Tr/4 <; fat| JitM.
It is important to tiote thax^ as in continuous time, not every discrete-time LTI system
has 3 frequeivcy response. For cKampk, the LTI system with impulse rcspcjnse h\Ti} =
2"w[TM] does not have -^ finite resporiiie to sinusoidal inputs, which is reflected in the fact

358

The Discfete-nme Fourier Transform

Ctiap. 5

that the Fourier transform analysis equation For h[n] divei^es. However, if an LTI system is stable, then, from Section 2.3.7, its impulse response is absolutely itiimmable; that is,

2 \^Mi < *-

(5,59)

Therefore, the frequency response dways converges for stable systems. In using Fourier methods, we wil^ be restricting ourselves to systems with impulse responses that have welldefined Fourier transforms. In Chapter 10, we will introduce an extension of the Fourier
transform referred to as the z-transform that will allow us to uac transform techniques for LTI sy&tems for which the frequency response does not converge.

5,5 THE MULT1PUCATTON PROPERTY

In Section 4.5, we introduced the multiplication property for continuous- time signals and indicated some of its applicMions through several examples. An analogous property exists for discrete-time signals and plays a similar role in applic;adons. In this section^ we derive this result directly and give an example of its use. In Chapters 7 and S, we will iise the
multiplication property in the cotitejit of our discussions of sampling and communications. Consider y[n] equal to the product of xi[rj] and Xil^h *iih Yie^*^}. A^](^^">, and
^ti^^"^) denoting the corresponding Fourier transforms. Then

^1-^

21 = Y(e^-'} =

y\n]e-^''"'

Xi[n]x2Me ^"",

or smce

it follows that

2^ J317

X n^-)=

^2t'^i{^|^ ^iC-^^v^'va

(5.60) (5.61)

Interchanging the order of summation and integration, we obtain

Y(ÈJ'^) = J_

^-

X X,ie^^)

x^\n^e-^'--^"^ do.

(5,62)

The bracketed summation is X2ie^^^'*^^), and consequently, eq. (5.62) becomes

(5,631

Sec. 5,5 ' TTie Muiti pi (cation Pfoperty

3fi*

Equation (5.63) correspotMis to aperiodic convolution of Xiie^*^) and JV^C^^"), smd the

integral in this equation can be evaluated over any interval of length 2ir, The usual form

-£ of convolution (in which the integral ranges from

to +£) is often referred to as ape-

riodic convolution to distinguish it horn periodic convolution. The mechanics of periodic

convolution are most easily illustrated through an example.

Example 5.15
Consider the problem of ftodlDg the Fourier transform Xie-'") of a signal xln] which \^ the product'of two other signals; that is^
x[n] ^ xi[n]x2[nl

where

" ^ , ^
^^ '"^

siii{3Trn/4)

and

= X2[n]

s\a{trtt/2)

TTfi

From the mullipUc^tionprojKTty given in eq. (5-63). we know tbaUtCe-'*^ 1 is the periodic

X2U^h convolution o(X](e^*^) and

where the integral im eq. {5.63) can be taken over

< < any inierv^l of length 2ir. Choosing the interval -it

$

tt, we ottain

^ r Xis^n =

Xj(¨^^*')Jt^(eJ*^-*'V<*.

(5.64)

Equation f5.64) resembles aperiodic convolution, eicept for the fact that the inte-

-v gration is limited to the interval

<

^ ir. However* we can convert the equation

tmo an ordinary convolution by defining

i,(..-) = [^i('-"')

^ for --JT <. Qi

tr

otherwise

^]U^% Then, rtpliicing X\{e'^'i in eq. <5.64) by

and using the fact that Xi{e^) is zero

> fnr ^

TT, we see that

I

I

Thus, Xie^'^) is

l/2fl- times

ihe aperiodLc convolution

of

the

i^ctanguJar

pulse

jf i

f^^")

and the penodic square wave X2(tf''*l. both of which are shown in Figure 5. 19. The result

of thisconvotuiion is the Fourier transfomn X(^) shown in Figure 5.20.

J90

-2ti

The Discrete-rime Fourier Transform

Chap. 5

S^i(en
1
r ~l
If
2-n

r fl
n-^ 1

- 1

1

-2^

4

2lT

Fi^re 5.1^ Jfi(^) rfrpresenling one period trf Jfi(&^), ant Xt*^'")- T^e
Irneir convoFution ol ^I'fl'^) and Jfp(^) correspoids to the peiodic convolu

x(en

Figure 5.20 Result of tho periodic [involution in Example 5.15
5.6 TABLES OF FOURIER TRANSFORM PROPERTIES
AND BASIC FOURJER TRANSFORM PAJRS
In Tabic 5J , we summariie a number of important properties of the discrete -ame Fourier transfomi and indicate the section of the text in ^vbich each is discussed. In Table 5.2, we
summarise sume of the basic and most important discrete-time Fourier transfcmi pairs.
Many at these have been derived in examples in the chapter.
5.7 DUALfTV
In considering the continuous- time Fourier traniiforni, we observed a symmetry or duali:> between the analysis equation (4,9) and the synthesis equation (4.3). No torresponding
duality exists between the analysis equation (5,9) and the synthesis equation 1 5.8) for die discrete-time Fourier transform. However, there is a duality in the discrete-time Fouriet s^rf^j equations (3.W) and (3.95), which we develop in Section 5,7.1, In addition, there is

Set. 5.7

Duality

391

TABJ,E 5.1 PRO^RTIES OF THE DfSCRETE-TlME FOURfEft TRANSFORM

Section PE'opcrtj

A perliKllc Signal

5.3.2
5.3 4
5,1.7 5.4 5.5

Linearity
Time Shifting
Frequency Stiiftiag Conjugation Tinie RtvcTsal
Time Expsnsipd
Cdnvulutifin
MultapluTEirtoii

y[n]
+ ii.jc[n] by[n\
-r*|fl|
^lil[
x[n] * >-[n]

= mjltiFle of k
-7^ multipie of t

Famrier TraDSform Xte-"")] penodjcwitll r(f ^)J period 2tj-

5J.5
5..1.^

Differencing in Time Accumulatinn

Jfrn] - Jf[n - 1]

(1 - e ^")S:Cf^"^)

S.i.a

DifTcrentiatHsn in Frequency njr[¨]

I- -IT

5. -^.4

Cn^ivfealt Symmetry i^>r
Real Signal^L

x\ii\ real

5.3.4
13.^

Symmetry for Real. Even

jif[£] rt;u] an even

Symmetry for Et^aln Odd

x.\f\\ rcaJ and <Kid

Signal !i

Even -odd Decumpciitiun

x^\n\ - G^Ufi]} \^{^\ real]

ul Real SLsnals

^ j^^ ^ &d{-^¨3} U[nJ "^alj

PifStval'^L Rclauori for Apenudic Èipial&

iXftr^Jl - |X(e-^)|
<K{e-''^) - <Xie '"")
Jf(eJ") real and even
X{^"") puTsl^ imaginary and
(Hid

a duiJhy relationship between the diiicrete-time Fourier transform and the continuous -time Fourier serieK. This lelaUon is discussed in Section S.7.2.
5.7.1 Duality in the Discrete-Ume Fourier Series
Sin:;e the Fourier series coaffitients a^ of a periodic signal x[n] are themselves a periodic
sequence, we can expand the sequence a^ in a Fourier series. The duality property for
discrete-time Fourier series implies that the Fourier series coefficients for the periodic sequeticec?^ iire the values of (1/A0j:[-/i] {i,e,, are proportional to the values of the origind

)

TABLE 5.2 BASIC DiSCRETE-TlME FOURIER TRANSFOflM PAIRS

Signa]

Fonrkr lyansforni

V i;r

atÏ\i^ - -^-

Fourier Series Coefbdents (If pcriodk)
ifk

^Jftld"
Cns^^H

sino*!:!/!

= tin]

1

Periodic square wave

A"] =

I.

|n| '^ \'\

^ < 0, ^1

\n\

Nfl

and

T È[n- tA^l

^ -- -- 2'iT

S (ft>

ttiQ

2-jrf

s- -

^ + TT

- - {S<^

Wij

-ifl-J) -I- S(<^

wp - 2fl-Jl}

-- 2] i^<w - ft^ -2ftl) - S(tu + a.0 - ^TTi'jj

^ 27r

e(fr> 2Trl]

^ U ^ 2-7r

-- - ir*S

i

^ ^fl-

J,/

2ira

= {i) tJo 1. jt - m. md:V m^rlA'.
a* =
0, otNerwiit
ibj j^ iTTutiDiul =^ The sijna] is flpcnodjc
^ = la> tJD

fl*

U, Otherwise

^ ^ lb)

ifrational

The signaJ l^ iipenixbL-

^ <J> '"o -

a^ = -4-., k ^ -r.-f:^f^,-rÝ 2W.

0, iJtherwLS¨

^ i'b")

iTTjLiLiiuil :^ The ^ignaS is apenodjc

I t = ai^f. Ý2W.
0, nUicrwisc

at =

--^-- jt y^ (I -^ iV

"*y^

N =
¨t.

2Vl + 1 A = 0. ÝN.Ý2X. ,

-- = ifi

fur all >

tf'ti[n\ \ii\< I

I.
-i") 0,

^ \n\

*i\

|n| "> Wl

- , 1 of-i'"

_ t4*Wa

IV

^ W -r. IT

(^:

X(w>pcnDdic with periotl 2-17

6{n]

1

--

"I"!
*|fl - ^oJ

È ]_,-,. ^

'^^{cy--2vk)

--

f-j'"^!

--

{Jt+ l>a"4iln]t i^l <. '

(.-r-l)!

" ft\{T

l>! " Aft\,

\ti\< J

1
(l-^f-J")^
J
<l-*t^ ^'-)''

392

Se:. 5.7

Duality

j93

signid, teversed in time). To see this in mote detail^ con.sider two penod:c sequeiiLes with period A', related through di*^ summatjon

If we Jetm " jt and r = ¨, eq. (5.65) bccmrtei

Comparing this wid: eq, 0^5), we see that the sequence f[k] corre^pondv to the Fourier .series cueflideius of the signal ^[hJ. That is. if we adopt the noUtioti

x[n] * ^ a^

introduced in Chapter 3 for a pcriodiL; discrete-time sigtial ;ind its set of Foun^r coefhcients, the two periodic sequences related through eq, (5.65) satisfy

^ si"]

/[*]

(5.66)

m Altsmativcly, if we let = n and r =^ -^, eq 0.65) bccon:e.s

Comparing thl& widi eq, (3. 94), wc find that ( i/N)gl - tj coiresptrnd^ to the scqucn^^e of
Fourier senes coefficictiL* of fin]. That is,
iV
As in continuous time, thij? duality impJies that every property of the discrete -time Fourier senes has a dual, For example, referring to Table 3.2, we see that the pair of fiTop-
etties

and

^ ^jM2.f^)^^^^^

^^_^

C5 69)

are dual. Similarly, from the same table, we can ejttract another pair of dual properties:

^-- xtr\y\n - r]

v Nath<,

(5.70)

and

-- ^ jr[¨l>[n] * >

ijji^t ^

(5 71)

6

394

Th¨ Discretfl-Time Fourier Transform

Chap. 5

In additicn to its consequences for the properties of discrete-Lme Founer series, duality can often be useful ir Tedut;ing the complexity of the calculations involved in determining Fouriet series representations. This is illustrated in the following e?tample.
Example S.I
N Conjpjder the following periodic signal with a period of = 9

= x[fi]

^

1 sin(57r¨/9)

.

,

9 sm{^7Tn/9]

-

nË= multiple of 9
n ^ multipl-e of 9

^^ ^^^

In Chapter 3, we found thai a rectangular sqilme wave has Fourier coefficieals in a form
muc:h as in eq, (^.^2), È>uality, then, suggests that (he coefficients for j^lnj must be in the form rtf a rectangtjlar square wave. To see thii mere precisely, let gin] be a jectung^lar
N squiiT^ wave with period = ^ such that

The Founer series coefficienLs frt fff ^[n] <:aji be determined from Example 3. 1 2 aa

1 Hui^irkB)

-I

= i>k

<

5 -,

^ P jn-. '

^ j^ multiple of 9
t = mulhpleof9

The Fourier series analysis equation (3.95) for g\n] can now be written as

Interchangingthenamesof the variables J: aJidn and noting that ;vtfi]

=

we 6^,,

find that

Letting A ^ - --jt irt the ^um on the right side, we obtain

^=Z ^("]= H

''""'''
^'^ 2

FinaLy, moving the factor 1/9 inside the 'iummarion, we see that the right side of this

We equation has the form of the synthet,is equation (3.94) for xln].

thus canciude that

the Fourier coefficients of x[ri\ are given by

f 1/9,
-"^ ffA I 0,

^ \k\

2

^ 2

|it| =^ 4.

N and, of course, are periodic with period - 9.

Sec. 5.7

Duality

395

5,7.2 Duafity between the Discrete-Time Fourier Transform and the Continuous^Tlme Fourier Series

In addition to ihe duality for the discTCte Fourief series, ibere is a duahty between the

discrese-rinteVouncYSransform snd the cofttinuouj-riffte Fouiier .wries. Specifically, kt us

compare ihc conlinuou^-lime Fouher series equations (3.38) and (3 39) with the di$crele-

We time Fourier transform equations (5.8) and (5.9).

repeal diese equation^; here for coo-

veriient^e:

leq.(5.8)J [eq,(5.9)] Ieq.(3.3S)]

J- x[n] =

X(e^'^)eJ'"'iIo?. f

^T TO

Y(^J") =

4/i]e >'^^

= fl

-

-h-ac-
.^(0= ^^ ¨t^^^*^^

(5.73) (5.74) (5.75)

[eq.(3.39£]

= - cj;

[ x(r)^ ''^*^*'-'^f.

(576)

Note that eqs. (5.73) and (5.76) are very similar, as are eqs. (5.74) and (5.75), and
in fact, we can interpret eqs, (5.73) and (5.74) as a Fourier jjerie-i representation of the

periodic frequency response X(e^^). In particular, &mce X{e^*^) is aperiodic function ofiit

with period Itt, it has a Fourier series representation as a weighted sum of harmijnic^lly

related periodic exponendal funcdons of &£, all of which have the conunoEi perijsd of lir.

That is, X(e^*^) can be represented in a Fourier series as a weighted sum of the signals

^j<oij^
= m vt

U, Ý L, Ý2

From eq. (5.74), we see that the nth Fourier coefficient this

-- -- expansion i.e.. the coefficient multiplying e '*''^ is x[-n]. Furthermore, since the period

of X(t?J^) islir.eq. (5.73) can be interpreted as the Fourier series analysis equation for the Fourier series coefficient .v[jij--i.e., for the coefficient multiplying t "J"" in the express ipn

for X{^^} in eq, (5.74). The use of this duality relationship is best illustrated with an

example.

Example 5.T7

The duality between the discre[e-time Founer Trarnfornn synthesis equation and the coniitiuous-limc Fourier senes analysis equation may be exploited to determine the
discrete-time Fourier transform ^if the sequence

r,
x[n]

=

sin(7rn/2)

TTli

To uae duality, we first must identify a vontinuous-time isi^nd ^(r) *Itb period 7 = 2ir and Founer coefficients a^ = j:[jI]. From Exiunpie 3.5^ we know [hat if ^{f) is aperiodic square wave with period 2ir (or. equivaleotly. with fiindamtntal frequency io^i = 1 ) and
with

¨<'^Mft T7i <\t\ ^ tt'
then the Fourier series coefficients of g{j) are

--

396

Tie DiscretB-Time Fourier Tnnsf orm

Chap 5

= sin(jtri)
ai

= Consequently, if we take T^

it/2, we will have at = x[k]. In this case the anaJysis

equati^m for git) is

sin [TTkn] irk

1

f IT

1 J"^'^

Renaxrung Jt as n and t aitO}, we have

si"n(Trn/2)

(l)e ^'^dio. 2Tr }-,,r.

(.5.773

Replacing rt by - h on both sides of eq. (5.77) and noting that ihc sine function is even, we obtain

The right-hand &ide of this xiqaatiun has the farm of the Fourier transform synthesis equatioQ for x[n\, where

Xie''") =

^ 1

]fo\

ff^/2

In Table 5.3, we present a compact summary of the Fourier series and Fourier transforni ^xpre&siotis for both continuous- time and disorete-time signals, aiy] we also indicate
the duality relationships that apply in each case.

TABLE 5,3 SUMMARY OF FOURIER SERIES AND TRANSFORM EXPRESSIONS

Tiiuc dDDiaiA

rnntiiiLJUu^ tiinc
Frtquenfy donuin

Time danuin

DiAcrtle time
Frequency doiOAin

Kouricr Series

ib^l
CQiKtmuiTus rjmc pch¨ijic tn time

l-ouncr 1 rar&fcjrm continuous time
apcnodic in time

'^V xCfV-/w

m discicle [requency

r""^

discrete time

apenchlk in frcqjcncy in^^v, periodic lime

<^^ju--a-l-L--tWv^'^^

discrele frequency penwiic in frequency

X{j^) =

Ame-f'-"df

p
if'^naliiy"^ tontiniHius rrequency
^^rTM \^^ aperiDdic i n fretiucncv

discrete time apenodic in time

continuoiis frequency peiitxiic: in rreqoency

5.8 SYSTEMS ChiARACTERIZED BY UNEAR CONSTANT-COEFFICIENT
DIFFERENCE EQUATfQNS
A general linear constant-coefficient difference equation for an LTI system with inpat x [n\
and output y[n] is of the form

8

.

Sec 5.8

S/stems Ciaracterized by Linear Constant-Co^iciem Diffsrencs Equations

397

k=a-

k=c

The cla.=ia of systems described by $uch difference equations is quite ^n important and
useful Dnc. In this section, we take advantage of several of the properties of the discrete-
time Fourier ttansfomi to determine the frequency response H{e^*^) for an LTl system
described by siich an e<^uaiion. The approach we follow closely parallels the discussion
in Section 4,7 for continuous-time LTl systems described by linear constant-coefficient
differential equations.
There are two related ways in which to determine Hie^). The first of these, which
we illustrated in Section 3,11 for several simple difference equations, ei^plit^itly uses the fact that complex exponentials are eigenfunctions of LTl systems. Specifically, if x[ti] --
eJ""" is the input to an LTl ^ystetn^ then the oiitput must be of the form H(e^'^)e''''" Substi.
tuting these expressions into eq. (5.78) and perfotming some algebra allows us to sol\e for
we H(,e^*^ ), In this section, follow a second approach making use of the cotivolutioi^, linear-
ity, and dme-shifting properties of the discrete-time Fourier transform. ljS\.X(e^'^), y{e^*^)> and Hie^'^) denote die Fourier transforms of die input x[n], output y[n]^ mvl impulse re^pOFifie h[ri], respectively. The convolution property, eq. (5.48), of the discrete- time Fourier
cransfomn dun implies th^t

^. HW-> =

(5.79)

ApplyingtheFouriertransfoimto both sides ofeq.(5.7S) and Lising die Unearit^ and
time-shifting properties, we obtain the expression

or equivaletttly,

Comparing eq. (5 .SO) with eq, <4.76>, we see thai, as in the case of continuous time, /f [s^*^)
is a ratio of polynomials, but in discrete time the polynomials aj;e in the variable e'^'^.
The coefficients of the numerator polynomial are the same coefficients as appear on the right side of eq. (5 J8), and the coefficients of the denominator polynomial are the same as appear on the left side of that equation. Therefore, the ftequency response flf the LTl system specified by cq. (5,78) can be written down by inspection.
The difference equation (5.78) is generally referred to as an ^dt-^rder difference
N equation, as it involves delays in the output y[n} of up to time steps. Also, the denomi-
nator of H(s^") in eq. (5.80) is an Nth-order polynomial in e' i*^

Example 5. 1

Consider ihc causal LTl system that \^ characterized by the difference equation

y\n\ -<iy\n- 11 = x\n\

(5.S1)

9

--

396

The DiscretB-Time Fourier Transform

Chap. 5

< with |Èi| L Frono eq. yS.KO), the frequency response flf this system is

H{e^^) - ^

!

r-.

<5.82t

Comparing thiii with Example ^.1, we recognize it as the Foiiher transfonn of the se-
quence d"uiMj. Thus, the impulse lesponse of the system ir

h[n] - a"u\nl

(5,83t'

Exampfe 5. 1
Consider a causal LTI system that is characterized by the differcrLCe equation
y[n] - ^y[ft- 1] + iv[n- 2] = 2x[n].

(5.84 J

From ¨}. (5.80), the fntqutncy re^f^jn;^ is

H{e^) =

"

~^.

^

,

4

a

(5.R5,

As ahrst step in obtaining theimpuL^ response^ we factor the denominator of eq. (5.S5):

W(^^") -

-- . ,
i

(5.S6I

A3 Hi^tr''-') can be flipanded by the method of partiaJ fractions, as in Example

in the

appendix. The re&olt of this expansisn is

me^'^) =

1

-

j

.

(5.S7I

The inverse transform of each term can be recognized by inspectioti. with (he resilt thac

The procedure followed in Exampie 5.19 is identical in style to that used in contitiuous time. Specifically, after expanding Hie^"^) by the method of partial fractions, we can tind the inverse transform of each term by inspectionn The same approach can be applied to the frequency response of any LTI system described by a Imear constant-cocfftcLent dif-
^ ference equation in order to determine die system impulse response. Also^ illustrated in
the next exampJet if the Fourier transform A'(e''^) of the input to such a system i* a ratio of
polynomiaJs in e"-'*^, then K(^^"> is as well. In this ca.se, we can use the same technique
to find the response y{rL\ to the input Jf[n].
Example 5.20
Consider tJic LTI system of E^iample 5.19, and let the input to this system be

Q\ ^n] =

u{n\.

--

Sec. 6.9 Summary

399

Then, using eq, yS.BO) and Exampk 5.1 nr 5,1S, we obtain

= Yie''^) =- H(.^^*^)X(^'^)

2 L - L^-;-
2 - ^e-f^)(l- \e-"^)''

(5.syi

As described in the appendix, the form c^f theparttat-fractionexp^micn in this case is

ne ^ ;i^\

(5.90;

where the LK>nstants Èjh itj2tandif2i can be determined using the techniques -defcnbed in the appendiii. This particular expansioo is worked out in detail in Hxample A.4, and
the values cibtained are

B\

-4, B:2 - -2. B^\ --

s(J that

y(^j-> ^ -
4

-- 2

8

-i^ "^ ,

^1

(I

"-y

r

(5 9JJ

Tht fitst and tbirU terms are of the same type as. tho&e eticounter&d in Example 5-19. while the second term is of tKe same form as one seen in Example 5.13, Either from
these examples wi from T^le 5.2^ we can invert each of the terms in eq. (5.9 M to obtain
the inverse trans.form

y[n] = -iil-i"£fii-a kI/i]-

i:5.92^

5.9 SUMMARY
In this chapter, we have paralleled Chapter 4 as we developed the Fourier transform for
discrete-uine signals and examined many of its importatit prapetiies. Throughout the chaf^
ter, we have seen a great many similarities between continuou^-tiine and discrete-time Fourier analysis, and we have also seen some important differences. For example, the re-
latikjnship between Fourier seiies and Fourier transforms in discrete time is ei^actl^ analogous to that in continuous time. In particulars our derivatioti of the discrete-time Fourier trjnsfomn for aperiddic signals from the discrete- time Fovixier series representations is very much the aame as the con;esponding continuous-time detivation- FuTtherTnore. many
of tiie properties of continuous-dnie transfyrms have exact discrete-time counterparts. On
the other hand* in contrast to the continuous-time case, the discrete-^ime Fourier transform of an aperiodic signal is aJways periodic with period 2^7. In addition to similarities and
differences such as these, we have described the duality relationships among the Fourier
representations of continiiDus-tiine and discrete-time signals.
The most important simjhaiities between continuous- and discrete -time Fourier attal-
ym are in their uses in analyzing and representing signals and LTI systems. Specifically,
Uie convolution properly provides us with the basis for the frequency-domain analysis of
LTT systems. We have already seen some of the utility of this approach in our discussion of

400

The Discrete-Time Fourier Transform

Chag 5

m ilitering in Chapters 3-5 and t?ur examinacioFJ of Nystems describttl by linear constant-
coefficient differential or difference equations, and we will gain i further appreciation for its utility in Chapter 6, in which we examine filtering and time'Versus- frequency i.ssue? in
more detail. In addition, the mtiltipiit:atiora properties in continuous and discrete time are essential to our developmenr of sampling in Chapter 7 and coniTminications in Chapter 8.

Chapter 5 Problems

The first section of problenns belongs to the basic category and the answers are provided in the back of the book. Th* remaining three sections contain problcnns belonging to the
basic, advanced, and extension categories, respectively,

BASIC PROBLEMS WrTH AMSWERS

5.1. Use the Fourier transform analysis equatioti (5.9) t^ calculate the Fourier transforms

of:
(a) ({r'u[n-U

(b) (|)'"-^l

Sketch and label one period of the magnitude of each Fourier transform.

5*2* Use the Fourier transform analysis equation {5.9) to calculate the Fourier transfijrms
of:
(a) Bin- \] + d[n+ 1] (b) S[n-\-2] -S[n-2]

Sketch and label one period of the magnitude of each Fourier transfomi.

^ < S. 3. Determine the Fourier transfarm for --fr *j it in the case of each of the fol-

lowing p&riodic signals:

p (ft) sin(^M+

Cb) 2 + cos(^rt+p

5*4. Use the Fourier transform synthesis equation (5.8) to determine the inveree Fourier

transforms of:

(a)

Xii^fn

=

^^=_j_2^{i2ri5r(5(<<((*> - i27TrTfkc) + .fr=

^7t5S({o<,d -

J " 27rJt) + ^S{u>

+|

- 2irk)}

<(0 ^ IT

-1^. -IT <to r^

S.S. Use the Fourier transform synthesis equation (S.8) to determine th^ inverse Fourier
transform of Jtt^^^) = |JtC*^^'^)k*^^'""^ where

=
I^t^^"^)!

and <X{eJ'^) ^ - 3oj

Use your answer to detemine the values of w for which x[rj} = 0,
5,6, Given that T[n] has Fourier transform X(e^")^ express the Fourier [ransforms of the
following signals in term!, of Xie^^^y You may use the Fourier transform properties
listed in Table 5 J.
(a) x\[n] = x[l - n] + 4--1 - n]

Chap. 5 Problems

40i

S7, For each of the following Fourier trat^sforms, use FovirieytranRfomi properties (Table 5.1) to determine uhether the corresponding time-domaiti signal is (i) real, imagi-
nary, or neither and (ii) even, odd, or neither Do this without evaluating the inverse
ofiin> of the given Lransf^rms.

(b) Xzie^*^) - /siii(ij)OTs(5uj>

= (c) X^(.e-"^)

A{w) + e^^^*^'! where

A{w) - a f<H^l ^6BM = -^^^.

5^, Use Tables 5A and 5.2 to help determine x[n] wtien its Fourier transform is

5,9, The following four facts are given ab&ut a particular signsd x\_n] wUh Fourier trans-
form ^(f^");

= 1. x[nl

> for rt 0,

> 2. x[0] 0.

Determine A"[n].
5*10, Use Tabb* 5,1 and 5.2 in conjunction with the fact thai

to determine the numerical value of

-^ = ft

S,1L Consider a signal j?[rtl with Fourier transtbrm Gie^""). Suppose

where the sigital x{n] has a Fourier transform A'Cf-'*^). Detennine a real nuinber a

< < = such that

Q 2'^ and G(eJ*^)

G(f ^'*"~¯^).

5.12. Let

T7W J \ iTn
where + denotes convolution ai^d \io^\ -^ tt. Determine a stricter constraini on at^

.

40Z which ensures that

Tlie DJ$cretfl-Time Fourier Transform

Chap. 5

5,13. An LTI system with impulse response /ii[n] = (3>"h[m1 is connected in parallel
with another causal LTI system with impulse response h2[n]. The re.sulling parallel
interconnection has the frequency response

12-7^--'*' +e-J^'

Determine ^T[fl]r

5.14,

Suppose we arc given the following facts about an LTI system S with impulse re-
sponse h[n] and frequency response H(eJ*^):
-- 1^ <^r"[¨] * SM^ where g[n] = for n > 2 and n < 0,
2. Hie^""^) - L

Determine h[n\. 5.15, Let the inverse Fourier transform of F(e^*) be
y[n\ =

< Vfhere

tw^- <: tt. Deteiminc the value of tOc which ensures that

5.16, The Fourier transform of a particular signal is

Xiei"")

^
*-0 *

(1/2/
^-J(i4£-Tl^jlfl
4

I: can be shown tlux

where g[n] is of the form a"ulnj and q[n] is a periodic signal with period A/. (a> Determine the value of of
M (b) Determine the value of
(c) Is jfnjreal?
5.17. The signal x{n\ = (-1)" has a fundamental period of 2 and corresponding Fourier
series coefTicienta ajt. Use duality to determine the Fourier series coefficients bt of the signal ^[n] = fl,, with a fundamental pedod of 2.
5.18. Given the fact that

1 -- 2a COS w + a^

'

--

Chap ^ Problems

403

use duality to determine the Fourier series coefficients of the following continuous-
7-1: litre signal with peritxi

J^{t)

=

*
--
5 - 4co5(27ri)

5A9. Consider a causal and stable LTI .'iystem S whose input x[n] and output v[nj are related LKrough the second-order difference equadon

y\n] - -yin - IJ - -y[n - 2] = jtIt:].

(a) Deteimine the frequency response Hie^*^) for the system S. (h) Determine the impulse response h[n] for the system S.
A 5<20t carnal and stable LTJ system 5 ha$ the property that

tfffl]
-J

^"(5) "E"]

{a) Determine the frequency response //(e^***) for the system 5. (b) Determine a difference equation relating any input x{h] and the corresponding
output >'[n].

BASIC PROBLEMS

5JI, Compute the Fourier irarisform of each of the following signals;
<a) J([n] = u[n-l]-u[n-6^ (b> 4¨1 = (fy^l-n-X]
it) x[7i] - (|)l"l¨[-n-21

(e) 4'rl = (l)l"lcos(f(n- 1))

(f) 4") = n, ^3 ^ n s 3 0, otherwise
(g) j:[¨] = sin(^n) + cos(n)

(h) j[nl = sin(^H) + cos(^n)

^ - - - (i) x[n] =- x[n 6J. and jrfnj = u[n] a[n 5] iorD r^ n

5

= (j) x[n]

(n- l)(i>l¨l

(k) x\n] - (=iil^)cos(^n)

5.22. The following are the Fourier transforms of discrete-time signals. Determine the signal coTTesponding to each trans-form.

(a^ Xief^

(c) Xie^^) - ^-^-^ for -TT ^ i^ ^ TT

404

The Discrete-TlTne Founer Traosforrn

Chap, 5

<e> X(^v-> ^ y:^_(-l>^S(a> - ?Jt)
(0 A:(fj-> =

1

rt

m 5,23* L¨t A'(e''*^) denote the Fourier transform of the signaJ x[n\ depicted Figure F5.23.
Feiform the following calculations without e?cplicitly evaluating Kie^^^Y (a> Evaluate y(eJ¯),

<c> Evaluate {^^X^e^'^ydw. iA} FindX(eJ^).
(e) Determine and sketch the signal whose Fourier transform is (RÈ{x(jjj)}
(0 Evaluate:

m \:.

dm

dot

^(nl

-3 ilMh

-2-1
-1 I

12 3 4 5 6
T

Ffg PS-23

5,24. Determine which, il any, of the following signals hav* Fourier transforms that satisfy each of the foliowi tig conditions:

^ 2, 'ifT^Xie-''")}

0.

a 3, There exists a real such that e^'^'^Xi^^'^y is real.

4, \^^Xie^'^)doi = 0.

5, X{^^'^) periodic.
6, X(^J^) - 0.

(a) x[n] as in Figure P5.24(.a)

(b) x[n\as in Figurc P5.24(b)
(c) x[n] =

(d) x[n] = (i)N

xM (e)

= 6[rt- l] + S[n + 2l

(fl x[n] =

ig) 4/i]as in Figure P5,24(c)
(h) j;lfj] as in Figure P5 .24(d) S{n - l\- ^\n + l\

--

Chap. 5 Problems

405

2t
3.
at

.VI

I

-10 12 3 4 5 6

{a)

x(n!

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -I ñ I

*-- -- -' ñ"-! ñ--!

* I * I * I * I

* I

I

1~

Pi
x[n|
29

---* * ^--4--*-

1 -- -* 4 ñ--ñ *-

u"m:

(C>
m
2

£*
11." 11
Fig P5.24
5^- Consider the signa] depicted in Figure P5 ,25, Let the Fourier transform of this signal
be written in rectangular form as
Sketch Vhe function of ti^ne con-esponding to the transform

406

The Discrete-Tine Fourier Transforrr:

Chap. 5

4^1
3*

-2 1
J

23 45
1
-1

-2* Fig P5.Z5

5.26, Let x\[n\ be the discrete-time signal whosti Fouriei triinsfomi X^[ef'^) is depicted in Figure P5.26(ii). (ap Consider the signal X2ln] with Fourier transform Xzie^*^), as iUustraied in Figure P5-26{b>. lixpress ;'r2[fll i" terms of x\ [n]. [fJinr: First e;<press X^ie^"^ ) in teimis of Xy{eJ^), and then use propeiti&s of the Fourier transfonti.]
m (b) Repeat part (a) for Xi[n] with Fouriei transform X^ie^**), as shown Figure
P5,26(c).
<c) Let
A-
2 "^iM
a = ^^^
T ^\W

This quantity, which i.s the center of gravity nf the signd x\ [i], is usually referred to ^5 th& delay :ime of xnlnl. Findof, (You can do this without first determining Ji[n] exphcitly.)

fR^{X, i^}

JTM(X^te^^}

1
-\

1
--n

'

r

1

3&

1

1

T TT

63

1

TT

4jt

^1-"^
36 -1

[aj
Fig F5.26a

Chap. 5 Problems

Xs^e^^J

407

m)
^{^
%

(=>

FJg P5.26b,c

(dj Consider the signal J4[i] = Ji [^j + /'f^]. where

Sketch X4{eJ^),

= h[n]

siti(7r/iy6J

TTn

5.27. (a) Let c[¨] be a discrete-time signal with Founer transform X{ef'^\ ^vhich is il-
lustrated in Figure P5.27. Sketch the Fourier transform of
w[n\ = jr[rt]p[n]

for each of the following signals p{n]\

= (i) p{ri\ cos Trn

(ii) /£[¨] = cos(w/i/2)

- (Hi) /?[f^]

sin(7rn/2)

^8{n- (iv> /£[¨] =

2k]

^ pM (V)

=

S[n- 4k]

2lT

-TT _ IL

2 IT

2fT

4ir
Fig PS.27

408

The Discrete-Time Fourier Transform

Chap, 5

(bi Suppose that the signal w[n] of part (a) is applied as the inpulto an LTI system with unit sample response
sin(7rra/2)
TTfi
Etetertnine the output y[fi\ for each of the choices of p[n] in part (a).
5,28, The signals jr(rtl and g\n] arc known to have Fourier transforms A'(f^^) and G{e^^),
respectively. Furthermore. X(^^") and Gie^"^) arc related as follows^

(a| If jf[nl = {-- 1)", determine a sequence ^[n] such thai its Fourier transform

G(eJ^} satisfies eq. (P5,28-l). Are there other possible solutions for^[n]?

-- (b) Repeat the previous part for j:[¨]

(^)''i/[?i]

S J9, (a> Consider a discrete-time LTI system with impulse response

Use Fourier transforms to determine the response to eitch of the following input

signals:
(i) x[fi] = i^ru{n]

(ii) a[¨1 = in+])i^ru[n]

xM (iii)

= {-!)"

(b) Suppose that

2^^ T = h[n]

1 \"

(^n
u[nl

Use Fourier transforms to detennine the respoinse to each of the foJlowing in-
puts;

= (ii) x[ti\

c<js(7rre/2)

(c) Let x[n] and h[n] be signals with the following Foiirier transforms:

X{e''^) = 3e^^ + 1 - e-^"^ A^le-f^,

//(e>) = -ef"^ + 2e ^^"^ + f'^.

Determine y[n] = x[n]* h[n].

5,J0, In Chapter 4, we indicated thaL the continuous-time LTI system with impulse re-
sponse

--W h(t) =

fWt\
.
Sine

IT

\ TT i

sin Wt
TTt

plays a very important role in LTI system analysis. The same is true of the discrete-

time LTl system with impulse irespense

--W "I"} =

fWn\
.
sine

TT

\ TT I

smWn
TTtl

s

ChÈp. 5 ProbJems

409

<a> Determine and sketch the frequejicy response for the system with impulse response h[ti].
{b\ Consider the signal
-- x[n] - sinl-- ]-2ct3sl

Suppose that this signal is the input to LTE systems with the following impulse
responses Determine the output in each case,
(i) ti[n\ = V"^?i^

(Jii) h[n] = '''"^^^^;;'"'^-

-- (iv) h\n]

'^"''^"^*^)'>'"t^rt^.i

<c) Consider an LTI system with unit sample response

,r -,
h[n]

=-

ain(7rn/3)

Determine the output for each of the following inputs:

(i) Jrf ¨1 = the square wave depicted in Figure P5,30

o:

S (ii) x[n] =

Sffl- Si]

(iii) x[n] = (-1)" times the square wave depicted in Figure P5.30
(iv) x[n] = S(ji+ l] + 5[rt- 1]

-so n n mil i .., iii 11111""' B Fig P5,30

.j niii

i.

16

n

531. An LTI system 5 with impulse respt>nse h[n] and frequency response H{e^^) is
ktiown to have the property that^ when --w^nfo^ir,
-- cos Wo H * a£o cos¨(>nA'

ffl) Determine //(e^), (b> Determine h\n].

532.

Let /i| [¨| and /i^I^] be the impulse responses of causal LTI systems, and let H^ {e^"^) and H2{e^'") be the corresponding frequency responses. Under these conditions, is the following equation true in general or noL? Justify your answer.

uiry r i f" ., . ..... If 1

.1 .. . ...

1

j,j_.'''<"-i^"te I

¨*'-¨ññ-

Hi{eJ'^)H2(e^'^)dat.

410

The DiscrelB-Ti me Fourie r Transf o rm

Chap . 5

5.33. Consider a causal LTT system desmbed by the difference equation

" vfrt] + 2^^"*" ^^

'^''*^-

(a) Determine the frequency response H{e^^'^) of ihis system.
(b) What is the response of the system to the following inputs? (i) x[n] = {{ru[n]
(ii) x[n\= {-^ru\n]
(in) xVn\ = S[n^ + ^S\n - ]]
(iv) Afn] - S[n}-^ls[n- IJ
(c) Find the response to the inputs with the following Fourier transformer

!^" (ti> Xien -

(iii) Xie^^) =

I

<lv> Xie^n = 1 -hle-^J*^"

5.34. Consider a system consisting of the cascade of two LTI systems with frequency
responses

2 - e~^*^ 1 + y-^"^

and

Hjien = 1 - ^e-J'^ + je-J^'

(a) Find the difference equation describing the overall system. (b) Determine the impulse respoTLse of the overall system.
A 535- causal LTI system is described by the difference equation

-- y[n] - ay[n

= []

bx[n] + jc[n - ]].

where a is reaJ and less than 1 in magnitude. (a) Find a value of b such dlat the frequency response of the system .satisfies

= |if(^^")|

1, for all u>.

This kind of system is called an ail-pass sy^tem^ as it does not attenuate the

input f*^*^" forain;^' value of w. Use die value of ^ that you have found in the rest

of the problem.

^ 0>) Roughly sketch </f(f^^),0 :^ w tt, wheno - ^.

^ ^ -^ (c) Roughly sketch <//(^^*^),tl

ta

tt, when .J =

)

Chap 5 Problems

4Tt

(d)

Find and plot the output of this system with <J

=

^

when

the

input

is

From this exatnple;, we see that a nonlinear change in phase can have a signif-
icantly different effect on a signal than the lime shift that results from a linear
phase.
5Jfe. (a) Let /i[n] und g[n\ be the impulse responses of two stable discrete-time LTl sys-
tems thai are inverses of each other. What is the relationship between the fre-
quency responses of these two systems? (b) Consider causal LTI systems described by the following difference equations.
In each case, determine the impulse response of the inverse system and the difference equation that characterizes the inverse.
(i) >[n] = x[n] - ix[¨-l} (U) yln] + {y[n- = x[n]
(iU) yln ^ ^y[n-
tiv) yln] + ly[n - - iyf¨ - 2] = - x\_n] i^fl - 1] ^ lx[n - 2] (y) y[n] + yin - - iy[""Z} = 4n]-|A[H" 1] <vi} y[n] + ly{n - ' h[^ -2] = x[n]
(c) Consider the causal, discrete-time LTT system described by the diffetence equa-
tion

+ - y[ft] >f^ - 11 + ^y[n - 2i - - jr[rt 11 - ^x\n 2].

(P5.36-1)

What is the inverse of this system? Show that the inverse is not causaL Find an-
other causa] LTI system that is an "inverse with delay" of the system described
by eq. (P5.36-1). Specifically, ftnd a causal LTI system such tbac the output
- w[n\ in Figure P5 .36 equals jf[?i I].

m

LTl eystern de$cribsd t>y

V!nl

Causal
LTl

eq.tPS.36-1)

system

FJg P5.36

winl

ADVANCED PROBLEMS
5J7. Let X{e^*^) be the Fourier tratisfonn of x\ri]. Derive expressions in terms ofX{e'*^) for die Fourier transforms of the following signals. (Do not assume thiit x[n] is real
(a) m^^[¨J}
(b> x*[-n]
(c) fit^jffll)

.

412

The Discrete -Time Fourier Transform

Chap. 5

538. Lei X(^^") be the Fourier transform of a real signal x[n]. Show thai x\t\] can be
written as

by finding expressions^ for 5(w) iind C(w) in terms^ of X{e^"'). 539* Derive the convolution properly

= 5.40, Lei jc[n\ and /jfrt] bt two signals, and let y[n\

x[n] =* ft[n]. Write two t:xpre?,.sions

for y{0]^ one (using the convoltiiion sum directiy) in teiros of xin] and ft\nl and

one (using the louvolution property of Fourier tramiforms) in terms of K{e-''^) and

-- llie^^). Then, by u judicious choice of h{n], use the<ie two expressions to derive
Parseval's relation that is^

In a similar fashion, derive the following generalization of Panievars relation:

PI

in.

JT

A 5,41 Let j[nl be a periodic signal with period N. finite- duration signal x[n] is related
to -T[n] through

^ ^ N _ ^r^j

i -L-j- n(t

n

no +

\

"^

otherwise

for some mieger iiy . That is, x\ n] is equ al to jI n] oyer one period and zero el sewhere (a> ff ^[rtjhas Fourier series coefficients at and jr[n] has Fourier transform X(fJ'^),
shov^ th^t

regardless of the value of nt^ (b) Consider t:he following two signals:
j[n] = u[n\ -- u[n -- 5]
where A( is a poative integer. Let ay denote the Fourier coefficients of ^|n] and let JfCfJ*^) denote the Fourier transform of Ji[n]. (i) Determine a closed-form expression forXie^^).

,

Chap 6 Prohiems

*I3

(ii) Using the result of part (i), detemine an expression for the Founcr cocili-
cient&at-

SA2. In this problem, we derive the frequency ^hift property of the discrete-tune Fourier

xM tmnsfoim as a special case of the multiphc&ijon pfopsrty. Let

be any discrete-

time signal with Fourier transfonn Xit^"^), and let

(a) I>etermine and sketch the Fourier transform of

= p[n]

fJ*^"".

(b) The multiplication propeny of the Fourier transfonn tells us that, since
g[n] = p[n]x[nl.

Evaluate this integral to show that
5-43, Let x\_n\ be a signal with Fouriei transform X<e^**\ and let
g[n] =A2n]
be a signal whose Fourier transform is Gie^"^). In this problem, we derive the rela-
tionship between G<^^"> and X(c-'">. (a) Let

ExptBSs die Fourier transform V^e^^ ) of vln J in terms of Jf( e -'*' )
(b) Noting that vtn] - Ofornodd.show that die Fourier transform of v[2n] is equal
to V{e^2l
(c) Show that

= jc[2n]

v[2/tJ,

It follows that

Now use the result of part (a) to CKpress C(e^) in terms of X(e^*^). 5M. <a) Ut
x\[n] = cosf^ j+sinf^

414

The Discrete-Time Fourier Trarrstornn

Chap. &

bea signal, and kt X] (e^'*') denote the Fourier Lrinsfotm of A| [w]. Sketch Jf| [a], together with the signals with the foHowing Founer transforms;
< (i> Xiie^"^) = J!f](^^'^V^ iai| IT
(b) Let

be a continijous-tirtie signal. Note that X] [n\ can be regarded as a sequence ot evenly spaced samples of tv(0; that Ls,

xi[n] = MnT).

Show ihiit

X2[n] = w{nT - a)

and

= x:i\Ti]

w{nT ~

x^M and specify the values of a and 0. From this result we can conclude that
and xj [n] are also evenly spaced samples of w(t).
S.45* Consider a discrete-time signal x{n\ with Fourier transform as illujitrated in Figure P5.45. Provide dinnensioned sketches of the following continuous-time signals:
^ (a) xt(t) y:^^_^x[n]e^<^''^*^^"'

(R*?(X{Of

^ 1-

-4^L^1-,

^

-2iT

g IT

2Tr

fl£{X^e'-)^

-2ti

-tt -TL

tt

tt

2-1

2

2

tt
Fig F5.45

Ch^p 5 Probtems
< 5,46, In Example S.l, we showed that for \a\ \,
1 -cce-J'^^
isLi Use properties of the Founer transfoirm to show that (1 -ae-s^)^'
(b* Show by induciion that the invert Fourier transform of ^^^'") " (1 TM*^-;¨r
is

415

5,47, Determine whether each of the foHowing statements is true or false. Ju^tif^ your

answers. In each statemcDt, the Fourier transform of x[ti] 'm denoted by Xie^*^).

= > (Si) lfX{e^*^) = Y(È^t*^-''>. then x[n]

Ofor |n| 0.

> (b> IfXie^n = Y{tf^^'^-^^),then j[n] == for h| 0, = > (c) If X(.?J^) ;f(^J"^^>,thenx[rtl = Ofor |n| 0.

(d> IfX<e>) ^ X(eJ^),then4¨l = Oforjttl >0.

We 5,48*

are given a discrete-time, linear, time-invariant, causal system with input de-

noted by x[n] and output denoted by y[n]. This system is specified by the following

pair of difference equations, involving an intermediate signal w[n\:

y[n]

+

I
-y[n

-

IJ

+

w[n]

+

1
-w[n

-

1]

=

2 -x[nl

yM - ^y[n - 1] + 2w[tt] - 2w[n - H - -^x[nl

(a> Fmd the fi£quency response and unit sample response of the system.
(bj Find a single diflference equation relatit^g x[n] and yln] for the system.
A 5,49£ (a) particular discrete time system has input x[n] and output y[n]. The F4>urier
traji&fortns of these signals are related by the equation

aw
(i) Is the system linear? Clearly justify your answer. (ii) Is the system time invariant? Clearly justify vour answer.
(Ill) Wliatisy[rt}if4n] ^ S[n]1

^

4)6

The Discrete-Time Foun¨r Transform

Chap. ^

(b) Consider a discrete-time system for which the transfoim Y{e^*^) of the output
is rt;lated to the transform of the input thitiugh the relation

Find an expression for y[ti] in terms of jf[n],
5*50, (a) Suppose we want to design a discrete-time LTI system which has the property
that if the input is

4'il = (^]¨f¨l-^(^] u(n-U>

then the output is

>[¨) = |^)"aN.

(i) Find the impulse response and frequency response of a discrete-time LTI
system that has the foregoing property. (ii) Find a difference equation relating jf[Fi} and yln] that chaiactcri^ees the
system.
(b) Suppese that a system has the response (1/4)" w[n] to the input {n + l){ ]/2)''u[n]. If the output of this system is S{n] - {-\/2yu[ijl what is the input?
5.51. (a) Consider a discrete-time system with unit sample response

Determine a linear constant-coefficient difference equation relatitxg the input and output of the system,
(h) Figure V5.5 1 depicts a block diagram implementation of a causal LTI system, (i) Find a difference e¨{uation relating x[n] and vlnJTor this system. (ii) What is the frequency response of the system? (ill) Determine the system's impultre response

(^ x\n]

-' *

IL

-- 1 'Q KD

-- " 'Q
1

^^1^

1
.2
Fig P5.51

.

Chap. 5 Prodiems

4i7

S<52, {a) Let h\n] be the impulse response of a real, causal, discrete-time LTI system.
Show that the system is completely specified by [he real pan of its frequency response. (Hint: Show how h[n\ can be recovered from fir{A[H]}. What is the
Fourier transform of Z^h[ri\)?) This is the discrete-time counterpart of the realpart su^ciency property of causal LTI systems considered in Problem 4.47 for contmuous-tiitie systems, (b> Let h[n\ be real and causal. If

= + (R^iHieJ'-')}

1 fflcos2ftJ(a real),

determine h[n] and Hie^*"*}.
(c> Show that h[n\ can be completely recovered from knowledge of ilm{//(f^")}
and/ilO].
<d) Find two real, causal LTJ systetns whose frequency responses have imaginary
parts equal to sin tti

EXTENSION PROBLEMS

5.53. Ooe of the reasons for the tremendous gnjwth in the use of discrete-iime methods for
the analysis and synthesis of signals and systems v^as the development of exceed-
ingly efficient tools for performing Fourier analysis of discrete-time sequences. At the hean of these methods is a technique that is very closely allied with discrete-time Fourier analysis and that is ideally suited for use on a digital computer or for im-
m h plementation digital hardware. This technique the discrete Fourier transform
(DFT) for finite- duia don signals.
Let j:[n] be a signal of finite duration; that is, there is an integer N-\ so that

x[n\ = 0,

^ ^ outside the interval

n Ni - 1

Furthermore, let X(f J") denote the Fourier transform of ^[^1. We can constmct a

N periodic signal x[ri\ that is equal to x\n\ over one period. Specifically^ let

^ N]

N be a given integer, and let x[n] be periodic with period and such that

x[n] - x[nl

<} ^ n ^ N - \

The Fourier series coefficients for Jf[n] are given by

Choosing the intervaJ of summation to be that over which jc[n] ^ x[n], we obtain

^" '
1

= tt

The set of coefficients defined

by eq.

(P5.53-1 j

comprise

the

DFT of

x[n].

Specifi-

cally, the DFT of x\n] is usually denoted by X[k], and is defined as

^

418

The Discrete-Time Fourier Tfansform

Chap B

w ^

I

- = > jt[ft]

fl,

-^

^[¨lf "J*'^'^'^'^

Jt = OJ

N-'i

(P5 53-2)

The importance of the DFT stems from several facts. First noie that the origina]

DFT finite duration signal can be recovered from its

Specifically, we have

N- I
AinJ = '^X[k]e^^^^''^^"\

n = OA

- A'

I

^P5.53^3)

Thus^ the finite-duration signal t;an either be thought of as being specified by the finite set of no;izero values it assumes or by the finite set of valxies ofX[k] in its DFT.
A second important feature of the DFT is that there is an extremely fast algorithm
called the fast Frmrier transform (FFT)^ for its calculation <see Problem 5.54 for an mtrixluctioTi lo this extremely important technique). Also, because of its close
relationship to the discrete-time Fourier series and transform, the DFT iuheriLs some
of Eheir imponant properties.
^ (a) Assume that A' /V|. Show that
X[k] - l;f(f-'(^-'^'^JJ
where )C[k\ Is the DFT of x[n]. That is. the DFT corresponds to samples of
X(e*"') taken every Ztt/N. Equation (P5.53-3) leads us to conclude that x[n]
can be uniquely represented by these samples of Jf^^-''^).
M (b) l^i us consider samples of A^(e^") taken every 27T/Af, wher¨ < N\. These
samples correspatKl to more than one sequence of duration A^(, To illustrate this, consider the two signals jrp [a] and j^Ia] depicted in Figure P553. Show that if
we choose Af = 4, we have

for all values oik.

T'

p 1

T

0^? 3

n

-1

I I I 1 ?3 4[ 7

n

Fig P5.S3
5,54, As indicyted in Pr(}bJem 5.53, there are maiiy problems of practical imponance in which one wishes to calculate the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) of discrete-time
signals. Often, these signals are nf quite long duration, and 'vj\ such case^ it Is very

Chap. 5 Problems

4T9

important to use computationally efficient procedures. One of the reasons for the

signifiecint increase in the use of computerized techniques for the analysis of signals

was the development of a very efficient technique known as the fast Fourier trans-

DFT form (FFT) algorithm for the calculation of the

of finite-diuration sequences.

In this problem, we develop the priitciple on which the FFT is based.

A ^ ^ Let x[n] be * signal tiiat is outside the interval :S n

Ni - \. For

DFT Nf, the yV-poitil

of x[n] is given by

xm ^ X -

^[1k"'**'"'^^

- jt

0, 1

Jt = U

It is convenient to write eq. (P5.54-1 ) as

3 N-l

N-i (P5.5+-1)

where

ft=0

A (a) One method for calculating X[jtJ is by direct evaluation of eq. (P5.54-2^

useful meajiure of the cotnplexity of such a computation 1;^ the total number of

complex multiplications required. Show that the number of complex multipli-

= cations required lo evaluate eq. (P5,54-2) directly^ for jt 0, 1

- JV

I , is

N^ .

Assume

that jrl^l

is

complex

and

that

the

required

values

of

IV;^*

have

been

precomputed and stored in a table. For simplicity, do not exploit the fact that,

for cenain values of n and k, W^" is equal to Ý1 or Ý j and hence does not,

strictly speaking, require a full complex multipUcation.

(b) Suppose.that /Vis even. iLet/(rt] = jc[2n] represent the even-indexed samples

+ = of jf[fl], and let g[n] x[2n 1] represent the odd-indexed samples.

w ^ (i) Sho that /[nJ and glnj are zero outside the interval :^ it

iN/2)- 1.

(ii) Show that the A^-point DFT X[k] of x[n] can be expressed as

where

N-0

^^

n^n

= \ni:] + \w^G[kl k = a^l

^-L (P5.54^3)

2 0V/2)-l n = fi
n=0

420

The Discrete-Time Fourier Transform

Chap. 5

Show (ill)

that, for all Jt,

'^2

-I - G[kl

Note that F[kl k =0,1

= (N/l) - 1, and C[Jt], ft

0, I- . . , CV/2) -

1, are the (A'j'2)-point DFTs of /[n] and g[n], respectively. Thiis^ eq,

(P5,5^3) indicates that the length-^ DFT of x[n] can be calculated in

terms of two DFTs <if length l^Jl.

(ir) Determine the number of complex multiplications required to compute

X[kl k = 0,l2,...N-}, from eq. (P5.5A-3) by first computing F[k]

atid G[k]. [Make the .same assumptions about multiplications as in part (a),

and ignore the multiplications by the quantity 1/2 in eq. (P5.54-^J ] \c) ir like ,V, N/2 is even, then f[n] and g[n] cati each be decomposed mto se-

quences of even- and odd-indexed samples, and therefore, their DFTs can be

computed using the same process as in eq. (P5.54-3). Furthermore, ^ if is an integer power of 2, we can continue to iterate the process, thus achieving sig-

nificant savings in computation time. With this procedure^ approximately how
many complex multiplications are required for Af = 32, 256, 1 ,024. and 4,096?
Compare diis to the direct method of calculation in part (a).

5-55. In thiijproblem we introduce the concept of ivint/owm^, whic;h isof greacimponance both in [he design of LTl systems and in the spectral analysis of signals. Windowing
is the operation of taking a signal x[n] and multiplying it by a finite- duration windoy^ iign^i kv[^Jr That is,

= p[n] Ji[n\w[n\.

Note that p[n] is a^i>o of finite duration. The importance of windowing in spectral analysis stems from the fact that in
numertjus applications one wishes to compute the Fourier transform of a signal that
has been measured Sinceinpractice we cyn measure a signal jf[nj only over a finite
time interval (the time window), the actual i^ignal available for spet:tral analysis is

[0,

otherwise

-M where

:^ n :^ A/ is the time window. Thus,

p[n] = ji[n]w[n],

where w[tj] is the rectangular window: that is.

w[n] =
Of otherwise

(P5,55^1)

Windowing also plays a role in LTI system design. Specifically, for a variety of
reasons (such as the potendal utility of the FFT algorithm; see Problem P5.54). it is

.

Chap 5 Problems

421

often advantageous to design a system that has an impulse response of finite duration
to achieve some desired signal -processing objective. That is, we often begin with
a desired frequency response Hie^"^) whose invert trausform fj[n] is ao impulse
response of infinite (or at least excesavely long) duration. What is required {hen is the constnietlon of an impuhe response g[n] of finice duration whose transform G{e^'^) ade<]uately approximates H(e^")r One general approach to choosing g[n] is to find a window function vi^ ri] such thad the transfcrm of h[n]w[n] meets the desired
specifications for G(f^*^>,
Clearly^ the windowjog of a signal has an effect on the resulting spectrum. In
this problem, we illustrate that effecl. (a) To gain some understanding of the effect of windowing, consider windowing
the signal

2 = x\_n}

5[n- k]

t --^

using the rectangular window signal given in eq. (P5.55-1). (i) WhytJsXtfJ^)?
M (ii) Sketch die transform of p[n] = x[n\w[n\ when = }.
M mi) Do the same for = 10.
(b) Next, consider a signal x[h] whose Fourier transform is specified by

< ^ [ 0, 7rt4

|w

TT

I

Let p[n] = x[n]w[n], where w[a] is the rectangular wmdow of eq. <P5.55-1), Roughly sketch P{e^*^)forM = 4, 8, and 16.
{c> One of die problems with the use of a recwngular window is that it introduces
ripples in the tratisform P{e^'^). (This is in fact directly related to the Gibbs phenomenon.) For that reason^ a variety of other window signals have been developed. These signals are tapered; that is, they go from to 1 more gradually
than the abrupt transition of the rectangular window. The result is a reduction in
the ampiitude of the ripples iti P(e^") at (he expense of adding a bit of distortion in terms of further smoodiing of JË'( e ^'^ )
To illustrate the points just made, consider the signal x[n] described in part
(b), and let p[n] = x[n]w[nl where win] is the triangular ox Barrlett window;
that is,

[ 0,

otherwise

M Roughly sketch the Fourier transform of p(n] = x[n\w[n\ for = 4, 8, and
16. \Hint2 Note that the triangular signal can be obtained as a convolution of a rectangular signal with itself. This fact leads to a convenient expression for

422

Hie Discrete-Time Fourier Transform

Chap. 5

= id) ImX p[n] Jc[n]w[n]^ where >r[fi] is a raised cosine signal known as the Han-
nln^ window: i,e.,

= w[rj]
0.

otherwise

M Ruughly sketch Pief"^) f^jr

= 4,%, anii 16.

536. Let x[m. rt] be a signal that is a function of the two independeni, discrete variables
m and 71. In analogy with one dimension and with the continuous-time case treated
in Problem i.53, we can define the two-dimensional Fourier trnnsform g^ xlttu n\ ^ls

la) Show that eq. (P5.56-- l)caii be calculated as two syccessi\e one-diTTiensitsnal Fourier transforms, first in m, with n regarded as fixed, and then inn. Use thi^
result to determine an expression for x[m. n] in terms of X{e^'^', e^'^- ).
(b) Supposedly

x[m, n] = a[m\b[n].

wliere a[m] and frfn] are each functions of only one independent variable. Let
Aie^"^ } and B(e^'^ ) denote the Fourier transforms of a[rtj] and ij| nL respetti velv.
Express Xie^^^^, t^"^^) in terms ofAie^'^) and 5( *"""). (c) Determine the two-dimensional Fourier trdaisfoims of the fallowing signals:
m(i) xirrun] = Sim- l]S[n + 4\ x\m,n\ = (|r "^uin-lM-fJi]
(iii) x[m,n] = {{)" co!<i2TTm/2)u{n\
= (iv) x[tti. n] \, -2< m<2and-4<n<4
0. otherwise
h -2+ft<m<2+Fiand-4<ii<4
0, otherwise
^) (vi) xlm,n] = sin(^ +
(d) Determine the signal jrlm, /il whose Fourier transform is

= Y(t^*^i,*-J"'^)

1.

< < ^ \oi[\

^/4 and

^ \<02

7t/2

< < < < 0. fl^/4

|q) ] [

TT or 7r/2

Iwi^

tt

(e) Let j[yn,n] and h\m, n] be two signals whose two-dimensionul Fourier trajisforms are denoted by X{f^''^KeJ'^^-) and Hie^'^^i^^'^-), respei; lively. Determine the transforms of the following signals in terrns of >f(W"'| p^'"^) and

(I) (ii)
(lih

x{m. n]e^^^'"e^^^"

yi^Fi, n] =

x[k. rl

I 0,

m if = 2A:andn = 2r m if is not a multiple of 2 01 /r is not a multiple of 3

y[irt,n] = xlm.nWn^n]

6
Time and frequency
characterization
of signals and systems

6.0 INTRODUCTION
The frequency -domain characterization of an LTl system in terms of iL. frequency re-
sponse represents an alternative to the time doinaiji characterisation through convolution. Iti ^aJyzing LTI systems, it is often psirticularly convenient to utihze the frequency domain because differentiaJ and difference equations and convolution operations in the time
domain become algebraic operations in the frequency domain. Moreover, concepts such as frequency^-seiective filtering are readily and simply visuaJiied in the frequency domain However, in system design, there are typicaJiy both time-domain and frequency-domain
consideraiions. For example, as we bridly discussed in Examples 4. IS and5. 1 2, and a;; we
will illustiate in more detail in this chapter, significant oscillatory behavior in the itnpujse
response pf a frequency-selective filter may be undesirable, and conseqLiently, we cnay
wish to sacrifice the level of frequency selectivity in a filler ir order to meet the required tolerances on impulse response behavior. Situations such as thi.s are the mle rather than
the exception in practice, as in most applications we ivould like lo specify or conshain certain characteristics of a system in boih the time domain and the frequency domam^
frequently resulting in conliicttng requirements. ?fcnce. in system design and analysis, it is important to relate time domain and frequency -domain characteristics .iud trade-offs. Introducing these issues and relationships is tlie primary focus of the chapter.

6. 1

THE MAGNFTUDE-PHASE REPRESENTATIOW OF THE FOURIER TRANSFORM

The Fourier transform is in getwral complex valued and, as we discussed, can be repre-
sented in terms of its real and imaginary comiponet^ts or in terms of magnitude and phase,
423

474

Time ^d Frequency Charactcrizalion of Sigrals and S/stem^

Ciap, 6

The magniiudc -phase repiesentation (^f the continuous- time Fourier transform Xijoi) is

Similarly the magnitude-phase representation of the discnete-time Fonrier transform

Xie'"^) = \X(e^n\e''^^^-'"'\

(6.2)

In the fodowirig discussion, we concentrate for the most part on the continiious-tiTne case
in describing and illustratii^ several points related to magnitude -phas¨ re-prviseniations. The essential points appl> equally to the discnete-dme case.
From the Fourier transform synthesis equation (4.8), we can think of X{j(o) as pro-
viding us with a decomposition of the signal jf(/) into a ^'sum" of complex exponentials at
different frequencies, fn fact, as discussed in Section 4.3.7, ]XXJtit)\^ may he interpreted
as the energy-density spectrum of xU)^ That is, \Xij{i>)\'^dii>f2'rr can be thought of as the amount of energy in the signal xU) that lies in the infiitiie&imal frequeiKy band between
w jw liTid -h dof. Thus, the magnitude jA'(/iw)] describes the basic frequency content of a
signal--i.e., |a:(jcu)| provides us with the information about the relative magnitudes of the
complex exponentials that make up x(i). For example, if ]X[ jw)l = outside of a small
band of frequencies centered at zerot then j(f) will display only relatively low- frequency
oscillations.
The phase angle <X{jwX on the other hand, docs not affect the amplitudes of the
individual frequency components, but instead provides us with infoimation concerning the
relative phases of these exponentials. The phase relationships captured by '^.X{jiii) have a significam effect on the nature of the signal x{t) and thus typically contain a substantial amount of information about the signal. In particular, depending upon what this phase function is, we can obtain very different-looking signals, even if the magnitude function remains linchanged. For example, consider again the example illustrated in Figure 3 J. In this case, a ship encounters the superposition of three wave trains, each of vi^iich can he modeled as a sinusoidal signal. With fixed magnitudes for these smusoids, die amplitude of their sum may t)e quite small or very iarge, depending on the relative phases. The implications of phase for the ship, therefore, are quite significant- As another illustration of
the effect of phase, txjnsider the sigt^

+ ^(0

=

^

1
+ ^ cos^l-rrt + <^] ) + cos(47rr

2
<^) + :^ cos<67r/ + ^3).

(6.3]

In Figure 3.4, we depicted xU) for the case when 4n ^ <^ -- (^3 = 0. In Figure 6. 1 , we
illustrate xU) for this case also ai^d for several other choices for the phase of the individual components. As this figure demonstrates, the resulting signals can diff^ significantly for
different relative phases.
In general, changes in the phase function of Xijoi) lead to changes in the time-
domain characteristics of the signal x<t) In some instances phase distortion may be
important, whereas in others it is not. For example, a well-known property of the auditor> system is a relative insensidvity to phase. Specifically, if the Fourier transform of a spoken sound (&.g., a vow^I) is subjected to a disionion such that the phase is changed but the magnitude is unchanged, the effect can he perceptually negligible, although the waveform
in the time dtimain may look considerably different. While mild phase distortions such as
those affecting individual sounds do not lead to a loss of intelligibility, more severe phase

,

Sec 6.1

The Mag nilu de-Phase Representation of The Fourier Transform

42S

a/ \rv \r\l\\r\l \r\j \r
^a)
vTV Wl/4/ Wlrv^
ib)

Figure 6.1 Tlie signal x{i) gW^n in

eq, (6.3) Jor several different choices

0^ \hG fhiase angies c^i . t^, anfl ^>^.

^ ^ ^ [3) .t,

c>j

= 0; (b)

^ = ^ (^1

4 rad, c^

B rad, <k

1È racf,

- - = (c) ffr^

6 rad, <fo

-2.1 rad, tfs

^ 0.93 rad. (d)

= 1.2 rad, (^ - 4.1

= rad, 4>3

-7.02 rad

dismrtions of speech certainly do. As im extreme illustration, iix{{) is a tape recording of a 5;cnLen(;e, then the signal Jf(-r) represents The sentence played backward. From Table 4. 1
a.ssuming xU) is real valued, the correspundirg effect in tKe frequency domam is to replace
the Fourier tran>form ptiase by its negative:

Thai is, the spectrum of a sentence played in reverse ha> the sajne magnitude function as the ^pet:t^llm tjf the original sentence and differs only in phase Cle;irly, this phase change has a significant impact on the inceliigibility of the recording.
A second example illustrutia^ the effect and importance of phase is found in examining images. As we briefly discussed mChapter3, ablack-and-white picture can be thought
of as a signal x{t-\, f^). \^ith t] demiting the honzontaJ coordinate of a point on the picture,
Tt the vertical coordinate, and x(f . f^) the brightness of the image at the potnt (ti . ^2). The Founer transftiriti^Ouih jct>2) of the image lepreseni.s a decomposition of the image into complex exponential catnp&nents of the form e^*^ 'i^^^^j'j that capture die spatial varia-
tions of j:(f|, ^2) ^t different frequencies in eiich of the two coordinate directions Several clemcniary aspects of two-dimensional Founer analysis are addressed in Problems 4^.53 and 5,56.
In viewing a picture, some of the most important visual infoimation is contained in
the edges and regions of high contrast. Intuitively, regions of maximum and minimum

4Z6

Time and Fretiuency Characterization of Signals and Systems

Chap. 6

jr^e-
\t>i

tPj
ijiieiisiu in a picture are place'i at which complex exponentials at different frequencies are
in phase. Therefore, it seern>; plituiible lo expect the phase af the Fourier transform of a
picture to contain much of the infonnationinthe picture, and in pEuticular, the phase should
capture che information about the edges. To substantiate this expectation, in Fegure &.2(a>
we have repeated the picture shown in Figure 1.4, In Figure 6.2(b) we have depicted the
magnitude of the two-dimensional Fourier transform of the image in Figure 6.2(a), where in this image the horizontal axis is ii}\ , the vertica] is &j^, and the brightness of the ^mage ai the point (dJi.oj^j is proportional to the magnitude of the transform A(juj], 7oi>:) of the imafic in Figure 6.2(a). Similarly, the phase of this transfoim is depicted in Figure 6.2(c). Figure 6.2(d) is the result of setting the phase IFigure6 2(t:)]of Xtjajp^ jtLt->lt^ zero{with£ut L'hurtging iL^ magnitade) and Lnvcrf^ transforming. In Figure 6.2(e) the magmtude of X<ja*i, jia^) was set equal to 1, but the phase was kept unchanged from what it wa^=l in
Figure 6.2(c). Finally, in Figure 6,2(f) we have depicted the imi^ge obtained by inverse
transforming the function obtained by using the pha,¨4e in Figure 6.2(c) and the magnitude
-- of the transform of a completely different image the picture shown in Figure 6.2<g}!
These figures clearly illustrate the impoTtance ofpha.se in representing jmages

Sec 62

The Maijnitude-PJiase Represertatfon ot the Fmaitency Responsa at LTI Sysrerns

427

-^

Hgure 6.2 (a) The image Shown in Figure 1 4;
(h) rriagnitude of thstwo-dmensfonal Fourier transform of (a); (c) phase of the Fojiier transform oif (a)j (d) picture whose Fourier transform has magnitude as in fb) and phase equai to zero; (¨) picture whose Fourier transform has magnrtude equal to t and phase as in (c); (f) picture wliose
Fourier transform has phase as in (c) and magnh
ttcte Bquai to that of the transform of the picture
^howi in (g).
6.2 THE MAGNITUDE-PHASE REPRESENTATION OF THE FREQUENCY RESPONSE OF LTf SYSTEMS
From the convolution propeny for continuous-tiine Fourier transforms, the transform y(Jio} of the output of an LTI system k related to die transfomi Xij<tf) of the input to the system by the equaticn
-- where //(/Qj) is the frequency response of the system i.e., the Fourier transform wf the
system^s impulse response. Similarly, in discrete time, the Fourier transforms of the input X(ei*^) and ouput Yief"^) of an LTI system with frequency response Wtf^'") are related by
Thus, the effect that an LTI system hai on the input is to change the complex amplj-
tudeof each of the frequency components of the signai. By looking at this efTect in icmn, of the magnitude-phase representation, we can understand the nature of the effect Ln more

428

Time^nd Frequency Characterization of Signals and Systems

Chap. E

detail. Specifically, in continuous time,
\Ëijui)\ = iHiMlXiMjl
and
<.Y(Jo?) = <H(£ + <X(£,

{6.5) (6.6)

and exacdy analogous relationships hold in the discrete-time case. From eq. (6.5), \te see
that the effect an LTI systeni has on the magnitude of the Fourier transform of the system is to scale it by the magnitude of the frequcincy response. For this reason, \HiJtii)\ (oi
\H{e-^^)\) is commonly referred to as the gain of the system. Also, from eq. (6.6), we see that the phase of the input <X{jii)) is modified by the LTI system by addit^g the phase ^.H{jii)) to it and ^.H{iia) is typically referred to as the phase shifi of the system. The phase shift of the system can change the relative phase relationships among the compo-
nents of the input, possibly resulting in significant modifications to the time domain char-
acteristi:;s of the input even when the gain of the system is constant fnr a|] frequencies. The changes in the magnitude and phase thai result from the application of an input to an LTI iystem may be either desirable^ if the input signal is modified in a useful way, or
undesirable, if the input is changed in an unwanted manner. In the latter case, the effects in eqs. (6.5) and (6-6> arc commonly referred tc as magnitude and phase dhtonions. In
the following sections, we describe several concepts and tools that allow us to understand these effects a bit more thoroughly.

6.2. f Linear and Nonlinear Phase

When the phase shift at the frequency ^(J is a linear function of tw, there is a particularly
straighlftirwiiTd interpretation of the effect in the time domain. Consider the continuoustime LT[ System with frequency response

mjo>) = f-^"'^
-- so that the system has unit gain and linear phase i.e.,

(6,7)

\H(Jaf)\ - 1, <H{jtD) = -wfi,.

(6.8)

As shown in Example 4.15, the system with this frequency response tharacieristiL: pro-
-- duces an output that is simply a time shift of the input i.e,.

yO)

=

xU /fl).

(6.9)

In the discrete-time case, the effect of linear phase is similar to that in the continuous-
time case when the slope of the linear phase is an integer Specifically, from Example 5 11,
-- we know that the LTI system with frequency response ^ "J*^q with linear phast function
-10 rjo produces an ouput diat i^ a simple shift of die input i e.* y[n\ = x[n-nft\. Thus, a lirear phase shift with an integer slope comesponds to a shift &f x[fi] by an integer number
of samples. When the phase slope is not an integer, the effect in the lime domain is siime-
what more complex and is discussed in Chapter 7, Section 1.5 Informally, the effect is a
time shift of the envelope of the sequence values, but the values diemselves may change.
While linear phase shifts lead to very simple and easily understood and visualized changes in a signal, if an input signal is subjected to a phase shift that is a nonlinear function of w, then the complex exponential components of the inpul at different
frequencies will be shifted in a manner that rcsuhs ir a change in their relative phases
When these exponentials are superimposed, we obtain a signal diat may look considerably
m different from the input signal. This is illustrated Figure 6.3 in the continuous -time case.

'

^ SG'-^

$ C u_ tA en

rd

c
Cl

_2 a.

^ ^ O a:

t:

s (U E

as'

^ ^ to ti. ¨A

.È cu

a>

"Ol "t)
^ Ca. f i^ :tÝ

es ai ^rf
^

o l4
-- E a to

ti
c£

c

nf d

[£

^ C È*":

^-- ÝÈ CL

m ^ "3c
2*

?
uÈ

o 14 c
c >^
n) v>

tn

4 cz r4 to

O VJ

-C

O =1 Ca.

"*--

o w>

C3 f 4?

5^ Z3

CO [=

C3-

¨^ A (J3 <u
^ "^ 4> C5" C. ST'

U ^ ^ """^ -C

4>

m -^

ed" .^
En

>A ,^ fij

o P E^

^ 3

(B

^D O)

CS' (n- rt

^ Ll_

13.

4-29

430

Time and Frequency Charactertzation o1 Signals and Systems

Chap. 6

In Figure 6.3(aK we depict a signal that is applied a^ the input to three Jifferent systems. Figure 6.3<h^ sht>ws the output when the signal is applied as input to a system wich fre-
= quency response H\ (jw) e J"'", resulting in an output that equals the input delayed by
/(i .seconds In Figure 6J(c), we display the output when the signal is applied to a system
with unity gain and nt>nlineaT phase function--i e.,

= H2\e^*")

ef'-^'^J*''\

[6.10)

where <H2{j(i>) Ls a nonlinear function oi to. Figure 6.3(d) shows the output from another system with nonlinear phase. In this case^ the corresponding frequency response has a
-- phase shift that ifi obtamed by adding a linear pha.se lenn to <W2(jtu) i.e.,

//:iO) - H2(j^)e ''^'".

ffi.in

Thus, the output in Figure 6 Jtd> can be thought of as the response to a cascade of the syjtem H2{Jo})- followed by a time shifty so that the waveforms in Figures 6.3(c) and (d) arc related through a simple time shift.
In Figure f>A we illustrate the effect of both linear and nonliitear phase in the diicrete-time case. Once again^ the signal in Figure 6.4(a) i^ applied as the input to three differcnL LTl .>ystems, all with unity gain (i.e., iHic'"')] = 1). The signals in the subse-
quent parts of Figure 6.4 depict the corresponding outputs. In die case of Figure fi.4(b), the system ha^; linear phase characteristics widi integer slope of -5, so that the output
equals the input delayed by 5. The phase -shifts for the syRtemfi a.=isociaied with Figures 6.4(c) and (d) are nonlinear, but the difference between these two pha^se functions is h near widi integer slope so that the signals in Figures 6.4(c) and {d> are related by a time -ihift.
Note that all the systemsconsidered in the examples illustrated in Figures 6.3amJ6.4 have unity galti, so that the magnittide of die Fourier transform of die input to any of these systems is passed through unchanged by the system. For this i^;ason, such systems are commonly referred to as tiU-pas^ .systems. The charactcristic.^ of an all-pass system
A are completely determined by its phase-shift characteristics. more general LTl system
//(/cu)or//(f^J"'>, of course, imparts both magnitude shaping through the gain \H{ju>)\ or
\H{e^'^')\ and phaiie shift that may or may not be linear.

6.2.2 Group Delay

As discussed in Section 6.2, 1 , systems with linear phase charactetisiics have the particu-

larly simple interpretation as time shifts. In fact, from eqs. (6.8) and (6.9), the phase slope

tells us the si/e of the time shift. Thit i^. in continuoias time^ if <H{jn*) = -toUu then

the system imparts a time shift of -?(i or, equLvatcntly, a delay ofty Sitnilarly, in discrete

time, <//(f^^) = -tuwti corresponds to a delay of no.

The concept of delay can be very naturally and simply extendad to include nonlin-

LP -- ear phase characteristics. Suppose that we wish to examine the effecLs of the phase of a

continuous-time

system on a narrowbatid input i,e,, an input x{t) vl^hose Fourier

transform is zem or negligibly small outside a small band of frequencies centered at ti> ^ By (i)(). taking die band to be very small, we can accurately approximate the phase

of this system in the band with the linear approximation

<Hijtit) - ~ii>-o)a.

i6.l2)

I

1

Sec. 62

The Magnitudfl-Piase Representation at the Frequency Response of LTI Systems

43

m

fbj

1

I

f,

'"\ k

1f 1T

Tt 1 1

n

i
1
fc)

Figure 6,4 (a) Discrete-time sigtiat

that is applied aÈ input to several sys-

tems for wMch the frequency response

T T tt

has unity magnitude; (b) response for
a system vvKh iirrear phase with s\o^

ai -5; (c) response tor a s/stam wjtfi

noniinear phase; and (d) response for

a system whose phase characteristic

is Itiat of part {c) plus a llnaar phase

(d)

ternr> with integer slope.

432

Time and Frequency Characterization erf Siflnals and Systems

Ctiap. 6

Ko that

y(jtxi)=- X{jw)\HiJof)\e ^*f '"'".

(6.13)

Thijs£ the approximate effect of the systerr on the Fourier trstnsfomn of this narrowband input consists of the magnitude ijhaping corrc:^ ponding to |^(^a>)|, Tnultiplication by an overall (^onsiant complex factor e' ^* and multiplication by a linear phase term e"-'*"
corresponding to a Ein:ie delay of a seconds. This time delay is referred to as the group
delay at u> = wo, as it is the effective common deUy experienced by the small band or
group of frequencies centered at &> = Èt>j>.
The group delay at each frequency equals the negative of the slope of the phase ai
that frequency; i,e,. the group delay is defined as

Tto^) = --^{<H(jo})l

(6.14]

The concept of group delay applies directly to discrete-time systems a;; well. In the nexl
example we illustrate the effect of nonconstant group delay on a signal.
Example 6. f
Consider the impulse response of an all-paf,^ syst&m with a group delay that varies with
frequeikcy. The frequency respun^e Hijui) Rjt our example is the product ofthree factors:
I.e.,

= r

t

where

niijio) -

J

-,

(o,l5;

^ ij| = 3 [ 5 rad/sec and ^]

0.066,

iui = 943 rad^scc anJ^. = [),033,

= tOT. 1888 rad^sec andf; = a05E.

m !t is often useful to express the frequencies w; measured radians per second in tt^mii
of frequtncies / measured in Hertz, where

In this case,
/i -5t}Hz /i- 150 Hz
A =- 300 Hz.
Since the numerator of each of the factors M,ijtu) is the tx>mpleji conjugate of
the tyrresponding denominator, it follows that \H,(jtii)i = l.Consetjuenlly. we may also

1

Sec. S2

The Magnitude-Phase Representation of the -requency Response of LTJ Systems

433

conclude ttiai
iHiM = 1.
The pha.se for each HXjif>) can be delermined from eq. l-fi.lS);

2^, fot/iLt,} I

-

]

(aj/t£,}'J

anJ

.1

y <Hiji^) -

<HXjo^)-

-

If the valuer of -^//(/tu) are restricted tw lie beiwecn -- tt and ir, wc k£btiuii the principalphase funcdun (i*-, the phase mttJuIo 2Tr), as shown in Figure 6r5(aj where we have
plotted the phage versus frequency measured in Hcirtz. Note that this function contains di^^oQtlDUities of size 2-n at various frequencies* making the phase functioTi non-
differentiable at those points. However^ the addition or subtraction of any integer multiple
of 27r to the value of the phase at any frequency leaves the originaJ frequency Tcsponse uncttm^ed. Thus, by appropriately adding or subtracting such integer mulljptcis of Ztt
from various portions of the principal phase^ we obtain the imv^rapped phase in Figure 6.5(b). The group delay as a function of frequency may now be computt^J as

A where <[Hijai)] represents the unwrappcd-phase function corresponding to Hij(v).
plot of rioi] is shown in Figure 6.5(c}, Observe that ^equencies in the close vicinity of
50 Hz experience greater delay than frequencies in the vicinity of 150 Hz or ^00 Hz. The
effect of such noncon slant group delay can also be qualitatively observed in the impulse
response (see Figure 6.5(d)) of the LTl system. Recall tbat IF{f(f>} = 1 . The frequency
components of the imipulse are all aligned in lime in such n v/ny that they combine lo form the impulse, whithis, of course^ highly localized in lime. Since tht; all-pass system has n<jnconÈtant Èroup delay^ different frequencies in the input arc delayed hy different amounts. This phenomenon is referred to as dtsp^rsion Tr. the current trample, the group delay is highest at 50 Hz, Consequently, we would eKpctt the latter parti of the impulse respotise to oscillite at lower hrequencies near 50 H;, This clearly evident jn Figure
6.5(d).
Example 6,2
Ntincanstani group delay is among the fackirs considered important for assessing the
tranimlssJon perfonnance of switched teletommtmications networki. In. a survey' Lnvrtlviflg locations all across the continental United Slates, AT&T/Bell System reported
group delay characteristics for varioui catc^ones of loll calls. Figure 6.6 dtsplay^ some of the reiiults of this study for two soch classes. In particular, what i^ ploited jn each curve in Figure 6.6<a> is the nonconsumt portion cf the group delay for a specific cate-
gory of toll calls. TTiat is, for each category, a common constant delay corresponding (o
'"Analog Transmission Perfomuncc on tKe S^iu^hed Telccymmunicaticnis Netwnrk/ by F P Puffy
T and W. Thaicher, Jr., in the B^U System Techfsica} Joumni, vol. 50, no. 4, ApnI. 1971.

434

Time and Frequency Characterization of Signals and Systems

Chap 6

-5
I
tt-10
f
-15

M -^^

t
w

oig

TOO

150

200

25fi

FreqLwocy (Hz}

1

'TMr

1

F

^^

1
100

1S<J

1
2m'

1
250

Fnqua DC y 41-14

4m

r

n

"

1

3O0

35D

400

TOO

1SQ

2D0

2S0

400

WM

01
TifTHi'Bech
Figure 6.5 Phase, graup delay, and impulse response for the atl-pasfi system of Exanpte ; ja) pnrclpal phase; (b) unwrapped phas¨; (c) g^oup delay;
(d) jmpufse respartse. Each of these quantitiw is plotted versus frequenci^ mea^ur^d in Hertz.

S¨c 6.2

The Wagnitude-Ptiase Representation o1 tJte Fr&quency Response of LTI S/stems

+35

/ftOO
B^mo
-- Q 5JQD0|-

i^ Shorty
-5
S M¨ dmm

'~~~"

Shart

^

\
Medium

M¨ dium
/

5
?,000 I.OOQ

Med un /
,,

w

/

\\
V
^ Short 1

/y
/ Short
__^

600

1,200

1,6C10

2,400

3.000

3,600

Frequency in (Hz)

(a)

1
15
ZD
?5

1
1
1

-30

600

1.200 l.aOO 3.400 Freciuend^' in {Hz)

3.CO0

3.600

Figure fr,6 (a) Non-constant portion of the group delay; and ^b) frequency re-

spoiise nnagnitude as functions of freqjenc/ tor short- and medium-distance toll calls

in switched telecofnmunications network [after Duffy and Thitcberl. Each of these

quantities is plotted versus frequency nneasured in Hertz. Aisc, as is commonly done

in practice, the magnitudes of the ^equency responses are plotted using a logarithmic

m scale in units of d&citeis. That is, what is plotted

(tj) is 20lagio \H{Jto)\ for the fre

^d quency responses corresponding to short-

medium-distafice toll calls. Ttie u^e of

m tNs logaTFthrnic scale for the frequency-response magnitudes is discussed in detail

Section 6.2.3.

the minirnvm of the gmup delay over all frequeiicLe& has been ^ul>iracied from the group

delay, and the rebuhiog difference is plotted in Figure 6r6[a)r Cc^n^equently, each curve

r\ Figure 6.6<a> represents the addition^ delay (bcyonJ this commoa coDEtant delay)

experienced by the different freqtiency components of tall calls within each category.

MEKUM Ttie curves labeled SHORT and

respectively represent the results for short-

distance (0-180 airline miles) and medium-disfance (lSi>-725 airline mito&t toll t;alls.
The group delay as a functionof frequency is seen to tie lowest at 1^700 Hi and increases

monotonically as wc move away from that figure in either dirpctionr When the group delay characteriatic^ illuRtrated in Figure 6,6(a) are combined

with the characteristics of the magnitude of the frequency TCiporiie reported in the same

Yf&T'BdlSystemsurvey and shown in Figure 6.6(b), weubtain impulse reponses of the

[ype ^htjwn in Figure 6.7. The impulse response in Figure 6, 7(a) corresponds to the short-

ii^itanco category. The very low- and very high-frequency components of the response

occur i::irlier than the components in the mid-frcquency range. This is compatible with

43 &

Tfme and Frequency Characten^ation of Signals and Systejiis

Ch^p 6

Tioie {rmsac)

Figure 6.7 IrnpulsE responses assoc^ted witfi the group d^fa^ arcj magnitude characteristics in Bgure 6,6: (a) impulse fesp{>nse corresponding to the short-distance category of toll calfs; [b) inpuise response for the medium-distance category
the corresponding group delay charactcfistic^ in Figure 6 6(it) Siroilarly. Figure 6 7fb>
illustrates the same phenomenon for the impulse response torrtspOrtJing to mediurn-
disrance toll calls.
6.2.3 Log-Magnjtude and Bode Plots
In graptiJcally displaying continuous-tinie or discrete-time Fourier transforms aiid systcn:i frequency r&sponscs in polar fonrt, it i^ tiften convenient to use a logarithmic scale for the
magnitude of the Fourier transform. One of the piincLpai r^a^ons for doing this can be seen

iic 1.2

Tlie Maflnrtude -Phase Representation of the Frequeni:^ Response of LT I Systems

4J7

from cqs. (6.5) and (6.6), whicli relate the magnUude and phase of the output of an LTl
system 10 those of the input and frequency response. Note that the phase relalionship is additive, while the magnitude relationship invt>lves the product of \H(jfit)\ and |X(jw)j. Thus, if the magnitudes of the Fourier transform are displayed on a logarithmic amplitude scale, eq. (6.5) takes the form of an additive relationship, namely,

log|n>)| - log|//(/¨i)| + loglA'O)!,

(6.16)

with an exactly analngous expression in discrete time.
Consequcndy, if we have a graph of the log magnitude and phase of the Fourier

transform of the input and the frequency response of an LTl system, the Fourier transform

of the output is obtained by adding the log-magnitude ploL<; and by adding the phase ploLs. In a similar fashion, since the frequency response of the cascade of LTl systems is the
product of the irdividual frequency responses, we can obtain plots of the log magnitude and
phase of the overall frequency response of cascaded systems by adding the corresponding ploti for each of the component systems. In addition, plotting the magnitude of the Fourier transform on a logarithmic scale allows detail to be displayed over a wider dynamic range. For example, on a hnear scale, the detailed magnitude characteristics in the stopband of

a frequency-selective filter with high attenuation are typically not evident, whereas they are on a logarithmic; scale.

Typically, the specific logarithmic amplitude scale used is in units of 2(1 logj^^^ in-
ferred to as decibels^ (abbreviated dB). Thus, dB corresponds to a frequency response with magnitude equal to 1 . 20 dB is equivalent to i gain of 10, - 20 dB corresponds to an attenuation of 0, 1 , and so on. Also, it is useful to note thai 6 dB approjtimateiy corresponds
to a gain of 2.

For continuous-time systems, it is also common and useful to use a logarithmic
frequency scale. Plots of 201og,^!//(jVo)| and <H(Jti}) versus log^uC^j) are referred to
as Bode plots. .\ typical Bede plot is Illustrated in Figure 6.8. Note that as discussed

in Section 4.3.3, if Mf) is real. Chen \H(Jfa)\ is an even function of at and <Hij<a} is

an odd function of to. Because of this, the plots for negative cu are superfluous and cart

tie obtained immediately from the ploLs for positive m. This, of course, makes it pos-

w > sible to plot frequency response charaeteristics versus logifl(tu) for

0, as in the

figure.

The use a t>f logarithrciic frequency scale offers a number of advantages in continuous time. For example, it often aUovvs a much wider range of frequencies to be displayed than does a linear frequency scale. In addition, on a logarithmic frequency scale, the shape

-The origin uf thii |>articular choice of units and the term decib^h can be traced to ttie definition of power TLiUoi in systemfi Specitically, since (he square of the magnitutlc uf Uie Fourier transform of a signal can
be interpreted as the energy per unit freqijency. &r [Kjwct, in a signal, the square of the magnitude, \li\;w)\- ur .''(^^Ol'- of the frequenc> responic uf a system can be th<>ughi of a.s the pftwer ratio bcEWecn ihc inpuc and the ovtput of an LIT syslcm. In hf>nor of AlcjLandcr Graham Bcll. the inventor of the ieiephor>e. Che tcCm bei wai mErodiiced to indicate a fatitor or in in a poiver rauo, and decibei was used to tSenoic one tenth of this factor on a logarithmic senile (so lliat the caicade of 10 systems wiUi l-dB power ratios each would reiuli in I t>cl of pcwer amplification). Thus. iOlog,y 1^0^)1" i^ ttic number of decibels uf power am phfication for ^e frequirny r&pun!ic//{;oj>, and itiis Itl tum cqiiaU 201rgm \HiJ<it)\ in magnitude amplfficjiJon.

438

Time and Frequency Charactenzation Df Signals and Systems

Chap. 6

1,000

3
X
-jr -
1.0QO Figure 6-8 A typical Bode plot. {Ud\s that to is platted using a logaritt^mic

[)f a particular response curve doesn't change if the frequency is scaled. <See ProbJem

6.30.) Fuithermbre for cOTitinuous-time LT! systems <ie^ribed by differential equations^

an approKimate sketch of die log magnitude v.s. log frequency can often i^e easily obtained

through the use of asyn^totes. In Section 6.5, we will illustrate this by developing sim-

ple piecev^ise-linear approximate Bode plots for first- and second-order continuous- time

.sy stems.

fc discrete time, the magnitudes of Fourier transforms and frequency responses are
often displayed in dB for die same reasons thai they are in continuous time. However,

in discrete lime a log^irithniic fretjueivcy scale i& not typically ufted. since tbe r^ge of

frequencies to be considered la- always limited and the advantage found for differential

equaUont; (i,e., linear asymptotes) does not apply to difTetence equations. Typical graphi

cal representations of the magnitjde and phase of a discrete-time frequency response are
shown in Figure 6.9. Here, we have plotted <H(p^'^) in radians and \H{e^'^)\m decibels

[i.e., 20 logio |//(eJ'^)|] as functions of w. Note that fw h\n] real, we actually need plot

w H(e^*^) only for :^

^ ir, because in this case the symmetry property of the Fourier

w ^ transform i mpHes that we can then calculate iff f-''^) for -^-JT :È

using the relations

\me-fn\ =

\mf

^"^ and <Hie-J^) = )|

- <i/(^^^). Furthermore, we need not consider

values of \w\ greaterthan tr^ because of the periodicity of Hie^'^).

Sec. 6.3

Time-Domain Properties of Ideal Frequency-Selective Filters

aopogiolHiyni

439

< iHfeJ^jl
2lT to
Figure 4.9 Typical {graphical representations d1 ttve nnagnitude and p^ase ot a discrete-time frequency response ^(e^^)
As cmj^iisized in this section, a logarithmic amplitude scale is often useful and important. However, there are many situations in which it is convenient to use a linear
m ampJitude scaJe, For example, di.scussing ideal filters for ivhich the magnitude of the
frequency response is a nonzero constant over some frequency bands and zero over others^ a linear amplitude scaJe is more appmpriiite, ThusS, we have introduced both linear and logarithmic graphical rcpiesentations for the magnitude of the Fourier transform and will u^e each as appropriate.
6.3 TfME-DOMAJN PJ?OPeRTIES OF fDEAL FREQUENCY-SELECTIVE FILTERS
In Chapter 3, we introduced the class Df frequency-selective filters, i,e., LTl systems with
frequency responses chosen so as to pass one or several bands of frequencies with little or
no attenuation and In stop or signific^tly attenuate frequencies outside those bands. As
we discussed in Chapters X 4, and 5, there are a number of issues of importance thatahsc

440

Time and Frequency Characterization of Signals and Systems

Chap. G

in irequency-seJective ri[t¨]ing app[icatiuns and that relate ditectly to the t.haraccen sties

of frdquen^y selective riltem. In ttiis section, we rate another look at such tillers and ttieij

We propertie&.

focus oar attention here on lowpa^s filterK, a.1though very similai: concepts

and results hold for other types of frequency-selective hi lets such as highpass or bandpass

^d filters. CSee Problems 6.5, 6.6, 6.26,

6, 38.)

X Ai introduced in Chapter a corttinnous-time ideal li>\^pass filter has a frequency

response cf the fomi

mjoi) -

1

^ \ii>\

(a^

> |cij|

oi^

(6,17)

This is illjstrated in Figure 6.liXsi). Similarly, a discrete-time ideal lowpas* filter has a freqijency response

Hie'"') =

(6. is:

£i\">)

ti>C fa)
H(e'^

-2Tr

^ ..

-tttf

oje

TT

?ir

{t>}

Figure 6.10 (a) The frequency resfcn^e of a continuDLs-tinie \6es\ low-
pass iiltEr; {b] the frequency response of a discrete-time ida^ lowp3S& filter.

and IS periodic in ^, as depicted in Figure 6.lO(b>- As can be Acen from eq.s. (6.17'} and (6.18) or from Figure 6.10, ideal lowpass filters have purfect frequency selectivity. Thit is, they pass without attenuation all frequencies at rtt lower than the cutoff frequency w^ and completely stop all fnsquencies in the stopband (i.e., higher than ljJ. Moreyver, these filters have ^ervj phase characteristics, so they introduce no phase distortion.
As we have seen in Section 6.2, nonlinear phase chara<;teristics can lead to signilicant changes ij\ the time-domain characteristics of a signal even wh&n the magnitude jfits

Sec. 6

Tiine'Dcimam Properties of JdesI F/fiquericy-Selectl^^e F Iters

441

.speclrum is rot changed by the system, arc! thus, a filter with a ntugnitudi' characteristic as
m in eq- (6 J 7) or eq (6.18). but wjth nonlineaj' phase, might produce umdesirable effetLs stimc applications On the other haiiJ, an ideal filter with Imear phase over the passbartd,
m as illustrated Figure 6.1 ^ , inttoduces only ii Kirnple lime <ihjft relative to the response of
the ideal lowpass filter with zero phase characttrislic

\H^*^y)\

to-
m^y

iif

Figure 6. 11 ContinLiOU54im¨ deal lowpass niter with linear phase charac-
teristic

In Examples 4.18 and 5.12, we computed the impulse response* of ideal iowpass
fiiterii- In particular, the itnpulsc response correspniidmg to the filter in cq. {6 17) it*

h(.t) - sinwtf
77/

^6.19.

which h shown in Figure 6.12(a). Similarly, the impulse response of the discrete- Li rue
m ideal filter eq. (6.18) is

hM = sinwtrt
TTti

(6.2()J

which IS depicted in Figure 6. L2(b) for***. ^ Tr/4 [feitSier of the ideal frequeutyresptin^es (if eqs. t6J7) and (6.18) is augmented with a lifieai phase chiuader.stic, the impulse rcipotist is simply delayed by an ainount equal to the negative of the skipe of this phase function, as is illustrated in Figure 6.13 for the contiruouK-Ume impulse response. Noie
that in both continuous and dijicrete firne, the width of the filler passband is proportional to ft),, \^'hilc the width £f the main lobe of the impulse is proportional to M^t^, 4s (he bandwidrh of the hiter increases, the imptihe response becomes narrower and vice /ersa, consistent with the inverse relat]{)uship between time and frequency discj^sied in Chipters 4 and 5.

1

t^{X} (IV

- . /\

"^"""'^ ^"^'^-^

"^^^f^

\ A TT
\y <ot

irV /
^

S^^/^ ""--^^

""^^^

(a)

T^ xLl TTT Jll. TTT 111 TIT

nn ^n 111

tit -rrr _LtJL

Figure 6.1 2 (a) The impulse response of the continuous -time Ideal lQwpa$$ fiiter

of Ftgure 6.1C(a); (b) the impulse response of the cuscrene-iime ideal lowpass tiiter o^

= Figure 6.lO(b;i with ate

Tr}A.

44Z

Figure 6,f 3 Impulse response of an ^deal lowpass fi ter with magnitude
and phase shown m Figure 6 1

Sec. 6.3

Time-Domain Properties of Ideal Frequency-S elective Filters

443

The step responses sit) and s{n\ of the ideal lowpass filters in cyrtinuoLis time and discrete time are displayed in Figure 6.14. In both cases^ wc note that the step responses exhibit sever.al cKaracteristics that may not be desirable. In particular, for these fillers, the step responses overshoot their long-term final values and exhibit oscillatt>ry behavior.
Irequently referred to as nn^in^. Also, recall that the step respon.^ is the ninning integral
or sum tjf the step responses--i.e,^

- xit)

/;(t)Jt,

T - ^[w]

him].

(a) alrt]
t T
Lit
TT
(b)
Figure 6.14 {a] Step response of 3 continuous-lime ide^l lowpass filter, (b) st3p resTwiM erf a di^crete^ifFie uhal Iwwpass flfter.

*44

Time and Frequency Charaoterization of Signafs and Systems

Cfiap. B

Since the impulse resp^w^ies for ihe ideal filters have main Jobes extending from -nioj, tn +7r/(i>, , the step responses undergo their most sigmficanl change in value over this time imt^rval. That is, the st>-t:alled rise time of the step response, a rough mensare of the response time of the hlter, is abo inversely related to the bandwidth of the filter

6.4 TIME-OOMAJN AND FREQUENCY-DOMAJN ASPECTS
OF NONIDEAL FVLTERS
The characten sties of ideal filters are not always desirable in practice For example, in many filtering contexts, the signals lo be separated do not always lie in totally disjoint
A frequency bar^ds. typical situation might be that depicted in Figure 6.15, where the spectra of two signals overlap shghtly. Tn such a case, we may wish to trade off the fi)-- delity with which die filter preserves one of these signals--^s ay, ;( i (I against the level A to which frequency components of the second signal xiit) are attenuated, fiher with
a gradual transidon from passband to stopband is generally preferable when nUering the
superposition of signaJs with overlapping spectra.

X{j^)

Figure 6, 1 5 Two spectra that are
Èli^htl^ overlapping.

Another consideration is suggested by examining the step responses of ideal lowpass filters, shown in Figure 6,14, For both continuous time and discrete time, die step response

asymptotically approaches a constant equal to the value of die step. In the vicinity of the

discontinuity, however, it overshm>LH this value and exhibits ringing. In sotne situations,

this time-domain behavior tnay be undesirable.

Moreover, even in cases where the ideal frequency-selective charaeterisdcs are desirable, they may not be attainable. For example, from ^s. (6^18) and (6.19) ano Fig-

When ure 6, 12, it is evident diat the ideal lowpass filter is noncausal.

filtering is to be

carried oat in real time, however^ causality is a tieces?>ajy constraint, and thus, a causal
A approximation to the ideal characteristics would be required. funher consideration that
motivates providing some flexibility in the filter characteristics is ease of implementation. In general, the more preci^ly we try to approximate or implement an ideal frequency-

selective filter, the more complicated or costly the implementation bccomen^ whether in
m terms of components such as resistors, capacitors, and operational amplifiers ctmtinu
ous time or in terms uf memory registers, mLiltiphers, and adders in discrete time. In many

contexts, a precise filter characteristic may not be essential and a simple filter will suffice.

For all of these reasons, nonideal filters are of of considerable practical importance,
and the characteristics of such filters are frequently si^ecified or quantified in terms of
m several parameters both the firequency and dme domain. First, because the magritude

characteristics of the ideal frequency-selective filter may be unachievable or undesirable.

Sec 6 4

Time-Domam and Frequency-Domain Aspects of Nonideal Fitters

445

it h preferable to allow some flexibility iji the behaviyr of the filter in the pa^sbanJ and
in the siopbantl, us well as to permit a more gradual transition between the passband and stopband, as opposed to the abrupt trans ition chai'acteristic of ideal filters. For example,
in ^e case of lowpaas filters, the specifications may allow some deviatioD from unitj gain
in the passband and from jero gain, in the slopband, as well as including both a pa-'^^band edge and stopband edge with a transition band between them, Thiis, specifications for a continuous-time lowpass filter are often stated to require the ma^itnde of the frequency
m rciipOTise of the filter to be restricted to the nonshaded area indicated Figure 6 16. In
this figure, a deviation from unily of plus and minus 5] is allowed in the passband, and a de'tiation of ^2 from zero is allowed in the stopband. The amount by which the frequency response differs from unity in the passband is referred to as the passhand ripple, and the amount by which it deviates from zero in the stopband is referred to as the sfophand ripple. The frequency <x>p is refeircd to as the passband edge and w^ as the stopband edge. The frequency range from tOp to (Os is provided for the transition fn>m passband to stopband and is referred to as the transition band. Similar definitions apply to discrete-time lowpass filters, as well as to other continuous- and discrete-time frequency-selective filters.

]H(i*y)

IS,

^''"'^

--^

^
>

l¨

1

"^
1

1

*

'

*

'

1

K

t

1

1

PaRfihAnd [ Tr^r^rtion ] Stopband

I

*

' <

*

'

4

'

'

**

t

^1

'

1*

1

' ^_ -H--,.

"*p

tila

...^*" ^^
.

Figure 6.16 Tolerances tor the
magnitude characteristic of a lowpas$ filter. The allowable passband ripple
is Èh and stapband nppfe is ^. The
dashed curve illustrates one possible frequency response that stays within the tolerable llTiits,

Tn addition to the specification of magnitude characteristics in the frequency domain, in some cases the specification of phase characteristics is al$o important In particular, a linear or nearly linear phase characteristic over the passhand of the filter is frequently desyable.
To control the time-domain behavior, specifications are frequently imposed on the step response of a filter. As illustrated in Figure 6.17, one quantity often of interest is the
-- risetntie jj. of the step response i.e., the interval over which the step response rises toward
its final value, in addition, the presence or absenceof oscillatory behavior, or ringings in the step response is often of importance. If such rtTigiiig is present, then there are three other quantities that are often used to characterize the nature of these oscillations: the overshoot
A of the final value of the step response^ the ringing frequency <i>n and the senling time
--ts i e., the time required for the step response to settle to widtin a specified tolerance of
its final value.
For nonideal lowpass filters, a trade-off tmiy be observed between the width of the transition band (a frequency -domain characteristic) and the Jiettling time of the step response (a time-domain charactcnstic). The foU^iwing exampic illustrates this trade-off.

446

Time and FreQU¨nc^ Charactenzat£)n of Signals and Systems

Chap. 6

Figure 6.1 7 Step response Of a contJnuous-time lowpjss filter, indicating

Ihe rise tifne tr, overehoot i, nnging Irequer-c/y wt, and settling tinw tf^.e..

ÝS the time sX Mfhich the step response s^ttle^ to within

of Its final vakis

Exampfe 6.3

Let us consider two S[}ecific lowpass litters designed to have a cutoff frequency of 5O0

Hz. Each filter ha& a :A^-oFder rational frequency response and a reaJ-valu^ impulse

reaponi>er The tu^fo filters are of spedtic types, one tefeired lo as Buttet^vorth titters and the other as. eL^Lptic filters. Both of these classes of iiltets are frequently used in

practice.

The magaitudes of the freqiae]r>cy responses of the (wo filters are plotted (versus

We frequency m&aiiUTed in Hertz) in Figure 6.18(a),

take the transition band of each

filter as the region aiuund the cutoff frequency (500 Hz) where the frequency response

magnitutie is neither within ,05 of unity magnitude (the passband ripple) nor within .05

of zero magnitude {the stopbajid ripple). From Figure 6.lS{a), it can be seen thit the transition band of the Butlerworth filter is wider than the ttansition baiid of the elliptic

filter

The price paid for the nan:o^^er transitioti band of the elliptic tiLter may be observed
in Ftgwre 6.1S<b), in which the step responses of both Alters aie thsplayed- We se? that

the ringing in the elliptic filter's step t%&ponse is more prominent than for the Butterworth

step response. In particular^ the setlUtig time for the step response is lon^ei in t!tx case

of the elliptic filter.

The consideration of the trade-offs betweeti time-doniain and frequency -domain characieristics and of other issues such as the complexity and cost of filters forms the core of the important field of filter design. In the next few sections, and in several of the
problems at the end of the chapter we provide additional examples of LTl systems and
filters 3nd their time- and fi^quency^jDmain characteristics.

----

Sec. 6.4

Time-Donrtam and Frequency-Domain Aspects of Nonideal Filters

1
C9 S o.e -

Ellipttc filter

447

^ oe ? 0,3 -
* 0.4
Q.2. 0.1

\ Butterworth filter
fcr^i >*t
2O0 400 600 800 l.DOO 1,200 1,400 1^600 1^00 2,000
Frequer>cv jHz]

1.2
-
t
"
o.e

^^^ Eliipttc filter

p\
f\i

^ Ekjtterwsrth filter

-

'
-

0.6

-

1
0.4
1

0.2
//
/1
1t
rt

1

8

10

12

14

16

ie

20

TImefmsec)

FJgure 6,18 Eximpiti Of a fiftll-order Butterworth filter and a fifth order eiitptic finer desigrad to have t\t same passband and stopband ripple and the 5ame cutoff frequency: (a) magnitudes of the frequency responses piotted
versus frequency measured in Hertz: (b) step responses.

448

Time ina Frequency CharacterUation of Signals and Systems

Chap. 6

6. S F£RSTORDeR AND SECONQORDER CONTINUOUS-TfME SYSTEMS
LTT systems described by linear constant-coeflicient difFerentLal equations are of great
practioal importance, b^ause many physical systems can be modeled by STich equations
and because systems of this type can often be conveniently implemented. For a variety of practical reasons* higti-ordcr systems sire freqxiently imfrfenM^nted ot represented by combining first-order and s¨cond-order systems in cascade or paratlel airangemenis. Consequently, the properties of first- and second-order systems p^ay an important rok in analyzing, designings and understanding the time-domain and frequency-domain behavior
of higher order systems. In d^is section, we discu^^s these bw-ortkr systems in deiail for continuous time. In Section 6.6^ we examine their distrete-time counterparts,

6.5, f First-Order Continuous-Time Systems

The differentia] equation for a lirst-order system is often expressed in the fomt

dy{t)
+ v(f) = AO'
iff

(6.21)

where t is a coefficient whose significance will be made clear shortly. The corresponding
frequency response for the first-order system is

and the impulse response is

JdJT + 1

= hit)

-e '''u{tX

T

f6.23)

which is sketched in Figure 6. 1 9(a>. The step response of the system is

V- sit) = h(t]*u(n =

e-'^''MtX

16.24)

This is sketched in Figure 6. J 9(b}. The parameter t is the time conjitanT cf the system, and

it controls the rate ai which the first-order system responds. For example, as illustrated in

= Figure 6,19, at r = t the impulse response has reached l/e tin>es its value at r

fl, and

the step response is withui Ue of its final value. Therefore, as t is decreased, the impulse
-- response decays more sharply, and the rise time ofthe step response becomes shorter i.e.,

it rises more sharply toward its final value. Note also that the step response of a first-order

system does not exhibit any ringing.

Figure 6.20 depicts the Bode plot of the frequency response of eq. <6.12). In this
figure we illustrate one of the advantages of using a logarithmic frequency scale: We can,
without too much difficulty, obtain a useful approximate Bode plot for a contiituous-time
first-order system. To see this. Jet us first ^xamitie the plot of the log magnitude of the
frequency response. Specifically, from eq, <S,22), we obtain

= 20\i)g^^^\H(Jw)\

- 10kg,^l(wT)^ ^- 1].

<5.25)

From this, we see that for tuT ^:: l, the log magnitude is approximately zero, while for otT J^ l.the log magnitude is approximately a /rfl^ar function of Ioe,f)(w). That is,

- 201og,|, \H{jw)\

for

-^ -ii

l/r,

(6,26)

h{t)

1
T \^
^V^^^^^
1
Te
l""-

T

t

(a)

t Figure 6. 19 CorrtinuouS'tiine first-

order S7&tem: (a] impulse response;

{b)

(b) step response.

20
OdB
20
-40 -
60

0.1 /T

3dB
,...J

A$.ymplCftic ^ approKlmation

X

1/t

10/t

100/1

it/4
3

Asymptotic approximatior

-Tr/2 -

-3ii/4

ai/T

1/t

1D/T

-L 10Q/T

Figure 6.20 Bode plot tor a
continuoas-tlme first-order system.
**9

450

Time and Frequency Characterization of Signals and Systems

Ch^p. 6

= -20log,^((j>) - 20 log (r) for ij ^i^ I/r. 111

In other words, for the first-order system, the low- and high-frequency asymptotes of the

log magnitude sure straight lines. The low -frequency asymptote [given by eq. (& 26)] isju.st

the 0-dB lire^ while the high-frequency iisymptole [ispccified by eq. (6-27)] corresponds ty

a Jecro^sc of 20 dB in \II(jdj)] for every tiecade (i.e., factor of ]0) in tj. ThisissoTnelimi;!,

referred to a&a '*2fVdB- per -decade" asymptote.

Note th^t the two asymptotic approx-imatiaiis given in eqs (6.26) and (6 27) are equai

= at the point h>E]o(w) = - loÈ|(f(rX tjrequivaiently, at

1/t. Interpreted graphically, this

mc^jis that the two stjaight-lme asymptotes Jiieet at cu = 1/t, which suggests a straight-

litfce approxiiraiion hi the magnitude plot. Thai is, our approNimation to 20 Io^iq ^fi(jiu)

^ equals for oj '^ ifr and Is giveti by eq. (6,27^ for tj

1/t. Thi(> appro sitnation is aUt;

sketched (as a dashed Jine) in Figure 6 20. The point at which the slope of the approxi ma-
lign changes is precisely ti> = l/r, which. For this reason, is often referred to as the hr^ak A freque/icy^ J so, note that at oi = 1/r the two terms f(tL£T)^ and 1] in the argument of the

logarithm in eq. {625) are equal. Thus, at this point, the actual value of the magnitude is

20 log,, [//(/i = -I0logit)(2)- -3dB T

i6,2S)

BcL-anse of this, the point at = 1/t h sometimes called the 3^1B point. From the ftgvire, wc see that only near the hreak frequency is there any significant error in the straight-line approximate Botte plot. Thus^ if we wish to obtain a more accurate sketch of the Bode plot, we need only modify the approximation near the break firequency.
It is also possible to tibtain a useful straight-line approximation to <H(Jw):

<HiJa}) = -tati'Vfi^O

0, f
+ =-<^ -(ir/4)[l0Ein(a.T) I],

^ isj

0,1/t

OJ/r ^ w ^ \0!r.

(6 29)

Note thai this approximation decreases linearly {from in the range

-- ^ 0,1

10

tU :^

^

T

T

-- to 7r;'2) as a function of logi^ift;)

i.e,, in the range from one decade below the break frequency to one decade above the break freijuency. Also, zero is the correct asymptotic value of <//(jw> for <it -^ 1/t, and -trll is the correct asymptotic value of <H[j<xi) for aJ :^ 1/t. Fuithermore, the approximadon
agrees with the actual value of <f/(;e>) at the break frequency &> = l/r, at which point

This asymptotic appro sirnation is also plotted in Rgure 6.20, and from it we can see how^ if desiiedn we can modify the straight-line approximation to obtain a more accurate sketch
of<//(/w).

Sac. 6.5

First-Order and Second-Order Continuous -Time Svst^ms

+51

Froju this first-order sy litem, ^ve can slgain see the inverse relationship between time
iind frequently. As we make r smaller, we speed up the time response of the system [i.e.,
hit) becomes more compressed toward the origin, and the rise time of the step respcnse i^ redueedl and we simultaneously make the break frequency large [i.e., Hf,j<o} becomes broader, since \H{J(i})\ =^ 1 for a larger ntnge of frequencies]. This can aKo be seen by multiplying tiie impulse response by rand observing the relaiionshtp between t>i(;) itnd

= Tft(r)

.-r/T
È-"^u{Tl

^/(,/w) =

[

jdiT T I

Thus, rhii) is a function of f/r and H{jti)) is a func:tion of <vt, and from this we see that
changing r is esj*emiHlly equivalent to a scaling in lime and frequeticy.

6-5.2 Second-Order Continuous-Time Systems The linear constant-coefficient differential equntiDn for a second- order system is

J;^

di

^M ^<n

(631)

Hquations of this type arise in many physical systems, including RLC circuits and me-
chanical .systetTJs. .sucJi as theonedlustrated fn Figure 6,2 1, composed of as pnn^, a mass, and a viscous damper or dashpot. In the figure, the input is the applied force x{i) and the output is (he displacement of the mass y(0 from some equilibrium position at which the spring exerts nc restoring force. The equation of motion for this sys[em is

d^yU)
dt^

dyif)

'

'-'

dt

OT

di- \mj dt \mr

m

Comparing this to eq (63 1), we see thai if we identify

and

W --m \ *^F1 ""

r-
2 J km

(6.32>

Spring k
YA VWV-
^
DashfKTt b

Mass
m
ini

y^} {d^spfacerrrftTt^

x(tl [appljed forced

Ftgure 6-2 1 Second -order sysiem CDHsistinp Df a spring and dastipot aiEachetJ to a moveable mass and a
flKsd support

4S2

Time add Frequency ChiTacterizatian of GiQuals and Sysienns

Chap 6

then [t^Acept for a scale factor of Aon ^^(0! theequadonof motion for the system of Figure
6.21 reduces to eq, (6.31),
The frequency response for the second-order s> stern of eq. (6.3 J > i.s

The denortiinator of H(jut) can be factored to yield

where

Fnr C ^ \,ci and ^2 are unequal, and we can perfonn n partial- frdClion expansion of Lhe
form
where

From eq. (6-35), the coirespcuiQing impulse response Tor the system is

= If ^

K then ci = t^ = -(i'ni mid

^ (/&j &*n)-

Froni Tabic 4.2, we find that in Lhi^ ciLse tht impulse response is

h{t) = u?^te~"''u{t).

(639)

Noie fn^rn eqs. (6,37) and <6.39), thai hifi/d},, is a function of &),,/. rurthermore, eq. (6.33) can be revritt^n as

//(ja>) -

^

from which we see that the frequertcy response is a function of </j}o^ri Thus, chiin^ing aj,,
is est^entially identical to a time and frequency scaling.
The piiiameter ^ is referred to as the dumping ratio and the parameter 0*^ as the utukimp^d natural frequency. The motivation for this termiTioiogy becomes clear when

Sec-fi-5

Fifst-Order and Second-Order Conitinuous-"nnr£e Systems

453

we take a more detailed look at ttie Impulse response and the step response of a sectind-
< < order system. Firet, from eq. (6.35)^ we see that forO ^ l,ci ando are complex, dud
we tan rewrite the impulse response ineq. (6.37) in the form

m = -itÝi,,t (i>r,& 2;\'T^ ^wt,\ <i>tie Vl-- fr2

(6.40)

< Thus, for < ^ i, the second-order system has an impulse response that has

damped oscillatory behavior, and in this case the system is referred to as being under-

> U dampedr If iT

boch C| and c^ are real and negative, and the impulse response is the

difference between two decaying exponeniiaJs. In this case, the system is overdamped The

= case of ^ = I,whent|

t^, is called the t'r(J/CÈ//J|vÈfÈiff^p^È/ case. The impijlse responses

(multiplieti by ^f(ii,i) for second-order systems with different values of f are plotted in Figure 6,22(a).

F^ure 6.22 Response of continu-

ous-t(m¨ second-order systems wilh

different values oJ the damping

C r?tio I a) impulse response:

(b)

(b) step response

454

Time and Frflquency Characterization of Siflnals and Systems

Chap 5

TTie step response of a second-order system can be calculated from e^. ^6 J7^ for ^ ?^ L Thin yields the expression

- - sit)

hit) * uit)

{ I -H A/

ti

mn.
t'^s

{6AI)

For ^ = i, we can uie eq. {639} to obtain .r^O - II -^-"f -w,^ ,- Wt! \¨<tl

(&.42I

The step response rf a second-order systejn is plotted tJi Figiu^ 6.22Cb> for several values of (. From thL^ figure, we see that in the underdamped case, the step response exhibits
both overshoot (ie,. the step response exceeds its final value) and Wn^m^ f i.e., oscillator)' behaviur). For^ = 1, the step response has the f^stestresponse (i.e., theshortestriijetimej
that is possible without overshoot and thus has the shortest settling time As ^ mtTcase^ beyond I, the response becomes slower. Thiscanbe seen from eqs. (63^) and(6,41 k Ast; increases, r| becomes smaller in magnitude, while c^ increases in magnitude. Ilierefore,
although the time constant ( l/|<^ :; |) associated with e' ^' decreases, the time t;{jn^tant (U[c [[]ñ associated with e*-^' increaseK. Consequently the term involving ^''- in eq. (6.41) lakes a longer time to decay to zero, and thus it is the time constant associated with this term that
deiemnines the settling lime of the step response. As a Jesuit the stepresp^inse cakes longer to settle for large values of ^, fn terms of our spring-dashpot example, as we ]nf;rease the magnitude of the damping coefticient h beyond the critical value at \vhvch i in eq. i6.33> equals 1, the motion of th& mass bectjmes increasingly sluggish.
Finally, note that, as we have said, the value of a),, essentialiy controls the time scale
(?f the responses h(n and s(t). For example, in the underdamped case, the larger ti),, is. the more compressed is the impulse response as a function ufr, and the higher is the frequency
m of the osciliations or ringing in both hi/} and s{tl In fact, fro eq. (6.40X we see that
the frequency of the oscillations in ha) and sU) is ii*n\^ - ^^, which does inLreitse with
increasing w,l. Note, however, that this frequency depends explicitly on the damping ratio
and does not equal (and is in fact smaller than) (o,,, except in the undamped case, -f = 0,
(It is f£r this rca-soTi that the parameter ti}^^ is traditionally referred to as the undamped natural frequency.) For the spring-dashpot example^ we therefore conclude that the mte of
oscillation of the ma'is equals ojjv vi^hen no dashpoL is present, and the oscillation frequency
dccteases whcti wc include the dashpot. In Figure 6.23, we have depicted the Bode plot of the frequency lesponye given in
eq, (6,33) for several values off. As in the first-order case ^ the logMithmicfretjueTicy i;cal¨ leads to linear high- and low-frequency asymptotes fcr the log magnitude Specifically,
fromeq. (6.33),

t3
20log.Jff(/Èo^| = -lOiog,^,

it>Ayt

From this expression, it follows that

fo.
20logi,,|//0)l-
4<]logiuitJ -h 40logi() w,,.
1^

for u> <s; oj,f

^^ fiyTiii

(i>,

(6.44)

Sec. 6.5

First-Order and Second-Order Cotitinuous-Time Systems

2C

OdB

=1 -ao

s
o

_ 40

-60 -

Asymptotic approximation r=^
È=15

-&0 L--

0.1 u^

"*n
*}>

10^

455
lOOu^n

-tt/4
^ -tt/E
V
- 3 it/4 -

^"=:=:^^^<

C=o/i

I
;-07

^ffll

Asymptotfc

^^^

1

1

1
1

QlltJr

10ai,

lOOWr

Figure 6. 73 Bode plots forÈecond-or<fer systems witti severaJ different
valjes of^damping ratio i.

Therefore, the low-frequency asymptote of the log magnitude is the 0-dB line, while the

high-frequency asymptote [given by eq. (6.44)] has a slope of --40 dB per decade; i.e.,

\Hijijty),\ decreases by 40 dB for ever>' increase in tti of a factor of 10. Also, riote that the

two straight-line asymptotes meet at the point ttt - w^. Thus, we obtain a straighL-line

approximation to the log magnitude by using the approximation given in eq. (644) for

^ ta

ttffl. For :his reason, titn is refenred to as the break frequency of the second-ard^T

systetn. This approximation is also plotted (ai a dashed line) in Figure 6.23.
We can, in addition, obtain a straight-line approximation to ^.H^jtu), \vhose exact

expression can be obtained frotn eq. (&.33):

= -- -- </f(jii>)

-1 tan

2^(w;

1

{Ci>/u?n

(&45)

456

Time and Frequency Charat^teri2atior> Of Signals and systems

Chap 6

The approximation is <H{jto)

0,
l<'fiof^!+ ll-
-- IT,

w ^ 0.lÈy,,

0,1^, ^ w ^ 10u>,,

^ at

lOdiii

(6,46)

which is aJiw> plotted in Figure 6-23. Note that the approximation and the ai:tua1 value again
are equal at the break frequency tj = a£,,, where

<//(>,,) = -|.

It 1& important to ob.';erve that the ÈLsymptotic approximations, eqs. (6.44) and (6.46),
we have obtained for a second-order systenh do not depend on f , while die actual plots of
\HiJftt)\ and ^Hijtii) certainly do, and thus, to (jbtain i^n accurate sketch, especially near
the break fre^^uet^cy w - ojj,, we must take this into accouTVt by motiifying the approxi-
oiationjj to conform more closely to tb& actual plots The disa-epancy is most pronounced
for small values t)f ^, In particular, note that in this case the actual log magnitude has a
= peak around cu -Wu. In fact, straightforward calculations using eq. (6.43) show that, for
^ ^ < -Jltl 0.707, \Hijw)] has a tnaximum valut at

= - -iJmaK

CiJ^v^l 2^3

(6.47)

and the value at this maximum point is

|//0,..)j =

J

(6.48)

> For^ 0.707^ however, H{Jix>) decreases monotontcaJly as tu increasefi from zeto. The
fact that H{ Ju> ) can have a peak i s ex tremel y important in die design of freque ncy selective filters and amplifiers. In some applications, one may want to design such a C]n:uit io
tha^ it has a sharp peak in the magnitude of its frequency response at some specified
frequency, thereby providing large frequency-selective amplification for sinusoids ai: fre-
Q quencies within a narrow band. The cfuaiity of such a circuit is defined to be a measure
of the sharpness of the peak. For a second-order circuit described by an equation of the
form of eq. (6,3 1 X the quality is usually taken to be

and from Figure 6.23 and cq. (6.43), we see that this definition has the proper behavior: The less damping there is in die system, the sharper is the peak in \H{jo))\.
6.5,3 Bode Plots for ftatlonal Frequency Responses At the start of this section, we indicated that first- and second-order systems can be used
as basic building blocks for more complex LTI systems with rational fre^^uency responses. One consequence of this is diat ttie Bode plots presented here essentially provide us with

Sec. 6.5

First-Ordfir ano Second-Order Continuous-Time Systems

457

all of the information wc need to constiut^t Bode plots for arbitrary rational frequency responses. Spec;ific;a]ly. we have described the Bode plots for the frequencj responses given by eqs. (6,22£ and (6.33). In addition, we can readily obtain the Bode plots for
frequency responses of the forms

//(yw) = 1 + jia-r

(&.49)

The Hode ploti for eqs. (6 49) and (6,50) fellow direoUy from Figures 6 20 and 6 21 and from the fact that
1
201og,jH(7w)|-20log,^
W(;ai)[
and

Atso, consider a system function that is a constant gain
H(£ = K.

< Since a: - I^Jf^^^if ^>f)aTid^ = ^ l^lf^'^ if

we 0,

see tiiat

20log^J//{£| - 2f]log|y|^|

0, \iK>Q

Since a rational frequency response c^in be factored irbto the product of a cxtnstant gain and
firj^t- and second-order terms, its Bode plot can be obtained t>> summing the ploL^ fortach
of the terms We illustrate further the construction of Bode plots in the nest two examples.

Example 6.4

Let us otnaiJi the Bode plot for the frequency response

V H(ja£) =

2x icr"

(;^)^+ 100 + 10*'

Fir-it, wc nole that

where Hi Jin) has ihe same form sa the thtaDdard second-wdei iVequcjicy resptinse specified by eq (6 33). It foils ws that

45B

Time and frequency Characterization of Signals and Systems

Chap. 6

By ci>mpaniig i^ijiii) with ihe (JTcquency ri^sponse in cq (633), wc cojiclude ihattj,, = 100 arid ^ - \I2 for fi{jii>). Using eq. <tt,44)j wc may nfrA' specify the asyTnplCJle^ for
20k>gjy|y/i:ja£)|:

- 20 1^ log nj

J f !!> )[

w ^ fL>r

1 00,

and

20log,J^(yw)i= 401oe,flW-FKO for ^^100.

muk ft folifjws that 20 log, Q iHiJoj)] will have [h¨

a&>mptotesH except for a constant

offsel at all frequern;ie> due 10 the addition of the 2LlIogjy2 term (which approxi-
m mately ecjtuilb 6 d6)r The dabbed lines, Figure 6-24ia) (^present these asymptotes.

(a)

(b)

Figure 6,24
vb) phase

Bflce plot for system function in EKampta 6 4, (a) magnlitude,

)

1

Sec 6-5

First-Order and Second-Order ContFnuQUS-Tlnie Systems

459

The solid curve in the same figure repreients the actual computer-generated Btjtle

plot for 201og|^lW(ja>)|. Sinte the value of ^ for^(^ÈÈj) is le^s than Jill, ihe actual

u = Bade plot has a. slight peak neui

100.

< To obtain a plot o f H{ji>> , we note that

and thai <M{j(i)) has its asympLotcs specified in accordance with eq. (6,46); that Js,

[0,
IHiJof) = < -(m2)FloÈ,u(W100j + Ij.
-TT.
I

^ to

]0

^ ^ 10

tu

1,000,

w ^ 1.000.

The asymptoiCM atrd the actual values for <H(jt^) are plotted with d:i^hed and ^olid
lines, respecTivcEy, in Figure 6.24(b).

Example 6.5

Consider the frequency response

mj^)

=

JOO(l + jbt)
U0+ yÈif)(100 + >)

To obtain the Bode plot fwHiJ(ii\ we rewrite it in the following faclurcd form:

Here, the fir^i factor is a constam, the next two factors have the standard fom; for a rirst-

order firequeocy response a;; specified in eq. (5.22), and the fourth factor is the reciprocal

of the same first-order standard form. The Bode plot for 201og|u \H(,Ja})\ is therefore the ium of the Bode plots ctirrcspoading to each of the factors. Fimbermore, the asymptotes

torrespondirig to each factor may be summed to obtain ihe asymptotes for the overal!

Bode plot. These asymptotes and the actual values of SOlogi^ \H(jm) are displayed in

Figure 6.15(a). Note that the constant factor of 1/10 accounts for an offset of -20 dB at

each frequency. The hreat frequency at &> = 1 cone¨iponds to the ( 1 + yoi ) factor, which

produces the 20 dB.'decade rise Ihat starts at ij = 1 and is canceled by the 20 dE/decade

decay that starts at the bre^ frequenc)' at (*> = 10 atld is due to the 1 /< 1 -i- ja>,'10) factor.

w Finally, the 1/(1 -I- ;ti*/lO0) factt^T contributes another break frequency at

= 100 and

a subsequent decay at the rate of 20 dB^decade.

Similarly we can construct the asymptotic approximation for Mijui) from the in-

dividual asymptotes for each factor, as illusuated. tPgether with a plot 4>f the exact value

of the phase, in Figure 6.25(h), in particula], the constant factor I/IO tonhibuies to

Che phise, while the factor (I + ywj contrihiites an asymptotic apprtt^imation that is

= for Èu < 0, 1, luid rises linearly as a funuion of log|f,(ftt) from a value of zero at t^i

0.

m to a value of 7r/2 radians .x\

- 10. However, this nse 1^ cattceled at tu ^ 1 b> the

asytty>totic approximation for the angle of lAl + joj/IO) ^vhich contributes t. linear de

crease in angle of vfl radians over the range of frequencies from *ti - 1 ro w = 100

Finally, the asymptotic approximation for the angle of 1/(1 + ;w/100) confiibutes an-

other linear decrease in angle of w^/2 radians over the range of frequencies from <o = 10
low =^ lOOO.

460

Tirn¨ and Frequency cnaracterizahon oT Signals and Systems

criap. b

1
tJ2

F 1

1
-

^^"^ -
11/4
C

\

-
-

Tr/4 -

V\

-

tr/2

1

.1

0.1

'^^-^

1

10

100

lora

Figure 6.25
[bj phase.

Bode plot for ^ysten:i function ^n Example 6 5' {^) Tnagmtude;

In our discussion of lirsL-order systems in this section, \ve restricted our atten-

> < tion to value.^ of T

0. In fact, ir is not difficult to chtck thai if t

0, then the

causal lirst-order system described by eq. (6.21) has an impulse response that is not

absolutely integrabJe, and consequently, the system is unstable. Similarly, in analyzing

the second-order causal system in eq. (6.31), we required that both I and w; be pos-
itive numbers. If either of these is not positive, the resulting impulse response is not

absolutely integrable. Thus, in this section we have restricted aneniion to those causal

first- and second-arder systems that ar& siable and for which we can define frequency

responses.

--

Sec. 6.6

First-Order and Second-Order Djscrete-Thme Systems

*6i

6.6 FIRST-ORDER AND SECOND-ORDER DISCRETE*TJME SYSTEMS
In this section, we exainine the properties of first- and second-order discrete-time LTT systems, paraUeling the iievelopinent in the preceding section. As in coniinuous timen any
system with a frequency response that ts a ratio of polynomials in f''*^--i.e., any discretetime LTI system described by a Unear constant-coefficient difference equation--can be written as a product or ^um of fiisl- and second -order systems, iinplying that these basic systems arc of considcrabJe value in both implementing and analyzing more complex systems. (See, for example. Problem 6.45.)

6.6, 1 First-Order DJscrete-Tlme Systems
Consider the first order causal LTI system described by the difference equation
y[n]-ay[n- 1] = x[n], with jfll < 1. From Example 5-18, the frequency response of this system is

(6.51)

and its impulse response is

h[n] = a"ulnl

(6.53)

which is illustrated in Figure 6.26 for several values of a. Also, the step response of the system is

= ------ = ^flj

/i[rtl'^fi[rt]

- I

a"*'^

- u[Ttl

I

a

(6.54)

which is illustrated in Figure 6.27. The magnitude of the parameter ij plays a role similar to that of the time constant
T in the continuous-lime flnst-order system. Specifically, \a\ determines the rate at which the first-order system responds. For example, fromeqs. (6.53) and (6.54) and Figures 6.26
and 6.27. we see that h{n] and i>] converge to their final value at the rate at which \a\"
converges to zero. Therefore, the impulse response decays sharply and the step response settles quickly for ]¨| small. For |fl| nearer to 1, these responses are slower. Note ihat unlike its contmuous-time countetpart, the first-order system described by eq. (6.51) can display
oscillatory behavior. This occurs when a < 0, in which case the step response e^^hibits
beth overshoot of its final value and ringing.
The magnitude and phase of the frequency response of tbe first-order system in
eq, (6.51) are, respectively,

im^ni

=

^. (1

+

^
a^

--

\

-^

2acosu>y^^

(6.55)

'

-UN +
I II
A)
O J^ ^

+ I

I'

n

II

k
>

h

r-Ico

^

+

1

p

^

II

Rf

>

^t t
4

i[
*

_ ñ1
-

-

ñ"

_^

4

-- n

o

1-

int^

p)l-*
I

o Ý.-

^
q
+1
11 -- "n"d^
F
^
^Vi
<£
T3
o
^f. t'* i^' nj
-m
"^
^
^^ "^
,^. II
*^ ^
OQPJ ^
"^
=1
CJ. ta
t,,
4lJ
5^^ ftf-.-
ni +1
È |. 3 fq S^-^

462

Sec 6 6

Rrst-Order and Second -Order Discrete-Tim* Sy^lems

slnj
32-
2
inimmmi inimmi

463
a ^2

sfnl

3--

^-

;

3..

1- mmmiiimmiiiiiii

{a}

5.
immmimmuimii
(b)

4-
t
2.-
ill

-^f
't#**4*1 t

5[n]
&
7-
stT
4
2
W

i- -Itit

3

-!

S

to
ItTtttttTtttttMTTtlttfr

r
3--
*TJ>TTTflt1tlffTTtttttTT

tc")

(d)

Figure 6,27 = SlflD response *[/j] of a first order s/stem: (a) a = ÝMA', (b) ^ ÝV2:{C)3= Ý3/A:{6)3 - Ý7/B

and

<Hi''^)

-

-1
-tan

ffsinw
I -- acosw

{6.56}

In Figure 6.2a(a>, we have plotted the log ma^tude and the pfiase of the frequency

< response in eq, (6.52) for several values of a > 0. The case of o

is illustrated in

464

Time Ènd Frequencv Characterizalion of Signals and S/Ste;i>j;

Ciap 6

> Figure 6.2R(b). From these figures, we see that tor ^y 0. the s>sterr. altefiuates hi^h

frequencies [i.e., \Hii''"')\ is f=maller for co near Ý tt than it is fof vt near 0!. while y^hon

a < 0, ihe KysLetm amplifies high frequencies and attenuates Jow frequencies. Note aiyo

mum that for j^jj small, the maxim jm and frJni

values, 1/fl +^Oaiid lAI ' a).iii |f/fr^^)

H On are close tiogetlier i n v alue, and the graph o f | f r J ^ )] i s rel ati vely fl at .

the other hand , fur

\a\ nea] I, these quantiiies differ significantly, and consequently |Wf^J*^)| is more sharply

peaked, providing filtering and amplification that is more s&lective over a narTr>w band of

frequencies.

20lo9io|H(ei-)| i

fa)
FJgurt 6.28 Magnituite and pihase of the frequency response of eq {6 52)
> for a first-order system: (a) plots for several values of a 0; (b) plots for
a< several values of

Sec 66

First-Order and Second-Order DiscrBle-Time Systems

--I
-|i

20log,u|K[e'
H-20dB
- - le

- - 12
- -^

- -4

^ -T

IT

-8

465
2ir

< H(ei")

Figure 6.2B Continued

6.6.2 Second-Order Oiscrete-'Hme Systems

Consider next the second-order tau^al LTI system described by

+ yin] - 2rcos 6y[n - 1]

- r^^[n

= 2]

jrf rt]

^ ^ with < r < I and

^ tt. The frequency response for this system is

I
1 -2rcQs9e-J*^ + jJ.^-^'^'
The d&nominator of Ii{e^*^) can be factored to obtain

H<eJ^) ^

1

(1 - (re^^ye J^}\1 - (fc -^fl)e -J^V

(6.57) (6.59)

466

Time and Frequency Characterization of Srgnals and Systems

Chap. 6

^ m For &

OT fr, the iwti factors the denominator of Hie^*^ ) are different, and a partial-

fraction expansioQ yteldE

men =

-- A
1 -{reJ^yef^

-f

I

B - {re--'^)e-f'^

(6.60)

whcre

A=

B=

<e.6i)

In this c^e, the impulse response of the system is

ForS =

=r

sind

u[nl

(6.62)

or ^^ the two fai;tor!^ in the denominatorofeq. (6.58) are the same. When fl = 0^

H(e^^) = -- 1

^

^

(1 -re-J-'^

(6.63)

and
When B = tr.

h[n] = {n+ Dr^uln].

<6.64>

H(e^'^) -

1

(1 + rs->)2

(6.65)

an<l

MnJ = (n + lX-r)"u[rt].

<6.66)

The impulse responses for secondnjrder systems are plotted in Figure 6.29 for a range

of values of r and 0. From this figure and from eq. (6.62), we see that the rate of decay of

-- h[n] is controlled by r- i.e., the closer r is t(> 1 , the slower is the decay in A|n]* Similarly,

0=0 die value of 9 deterraincs the frequency of oscilladon. For eiiample, with

theie is

= no oscilbd^Ti in h[n]^ while for

tt the oscilladons are rapid. The effect of different

values of r and B can also be seen by eitanrumng the step response of eq, (6.57). For 6 ?^

or TT,

= j[rt] = h{n] * u[n} A,'-1^-'r'e'i^TXB('~^^\'--r'e^'J'^:''tM. (6.67,

= Also, using the result of Problem 2.52, we fltid that for (? 0,

\
(f-l)^

r

,,

r"

(r-iy^

+

r
r-\

(¨

+

1)1^

wN.

while for -- tt,

(6.68)

^ -- s[n\ =

(r

1

+

r?
D'

+

+ '' .(-r)"
(r+ 1)^"

^(rt
r-f 1

+

l)(-r)"

u{nl

(6.69>

The step response is plotted in Figure 6.30, again ftir a range of values of r and 9.

'.

Sec. 6.6

First-Ordef and SBCOTid -Order Discrele-Time Syslems

r-l

'-i

H-0

1
b.
a

1
'-4
=
n

1
tS
k
Q

1
a

-I

467
f-

1
'-I
I

-J

'4

'=?

1

¨=?

--i-].

-

n

n

3

1

"-5

[

olf '

r

¨.5

'

^

n

ol

£-3
n

1
^*

3
n

1
ft~34r oL

1 f^

1 1

i. .__

oL

n

t
h. a 11'

3 n

H-TT

1
1 *

i
n

1
H = ir

1..

I"

n

-1
1
^ = ir
IJli"*""
n

Figure 6.29 Impulse response of the secoia-order syst&m of bo. (6.57) for a range
of values of ^ a^d 6.
The second-order system given by eq. (6,57) is the counterpart of the underditmped
second-order system in continuous time, while the special case of ^ = iR the critically damped case. That is, for any value of ^ other than zero, the impulse response has a damped

'-1

'-h

r^-

C ft -

nl
4
3
2
T mini
1

1
^-l
!

r=;

3

*}-^

2

1

4

r=;

3

.=-

2

1

4

""4

3

2
U
.[nTinmrnniniMminTmnn

31 "]
4 a ?
1
nil

S-TT

s[rij
4-
I

fh=Tr

linniiii

4| 1
3i t -n
2i
1
JiittmnnmEiimiJMIBL
n

sjn] 4

tt=T1

sn

i];fii!imt!i:TnmiL

istoteiTTie plot for r = ^ ,^-0 hasa different scale from the ethers.

4b8

figure 6,30 Step response of the second -order system cf eq. (6 57) for a fange of
values of r and fit.

Sec. 6.6

Ftrst- Order and Second-Order 0£screte-Time Systems

469

oscillaiary 1>eh3vifir, and the step response exhibits ringing and overshoot. The frequency response of this system ii depicted in Figure 6.3 1 for a number of values of r and 9 From
Figure 6.31, wesee that a band of frequencies is amplified* and rdetermines how sharply
peaked the frequency re^wnse is within this band.
As we have Just seen, the second-order system described in eq, (6.5^) has fai^tors
with complex coefficients (unless ^ = or tt). Il is also possible to consider second-order systems having factors with real coefticicnts. Specifically, consider

^(*''") = T.

:

-^7^ :

-^'

(^TM

where d\ and J2 ^^ both real numbers with |J| |, IJ2I "^ ^ - Equation (6.70) is the frequency
response for the difference equation

?Ologio|H[e'ni
24 dB

1=0

<. H(e^n

E-TT

ttt

(a;

Figure 6.31 Magnitude and phase of th& frequency response of tHe

- - second-order system of eq. (6.57). [a) 3

0; {b) e = W4; (c) fl

ii!2,

(d) f) == SttM; {e} 9 - tt. Each plot contains curves corresponding to
r- 1/4, 1/2, and 3/4.

470

Time and Frequer>cy Charactenaation of Signals and Systems

CJiap. 5

20 log to

^24 dB

- -20

r-'i

^ J^ -\ -7^f'* '-T

^ r -aiF

=*

"16 - 12
/>^-
- -4

2Tr

-s

-13

0< H[&J"')

In this cast.
where Thus,

{b)
Ffgure 6.3) Cof^tinued
y[n] - (dj + d2)y[n - 1] + ^|i2>[n - 2] - x[n]

-- --- -- A

H{^'^) = - -^

^

- 1 È/|(*"^¨

]

^ft
d^e J"^

A = ^Ý-, 3 ^

d^ -^.

ii^ -d^'

h[n\ = [Ad'! + Bd^Mnl

(<5.71)
(6.72) (6.73J (6,74)

Sec. 6.6

First-Order and Second-Order Dfscrate-Tlme Systems

20logioiH(eJ*^i

471

fl-
^HfeJ"")

2-n (jT

ic]

Fjgure 6-31 Coatinu&o
which is the sum of two decaying real exponentials. Also,

s[n] =

\-d^

u[nl

.^.75)

The system with frequency respcme given by eq. (6.70) corresponds to the cascade

of two first-ordtr systems. Therefore, we can deduce most of it*i properties from oui un

derstanding of the fir^t-ordercase. For example, the tog-magnitude and phase plots for eq.

(6.70) can be obtained by adding together the plois for each of the two first-order terms.

^w Al^, as we

for first-oidei: systems, the response of the system is fast if \d\ | and \d^\

are small, but the system has a !ong settling time if either of these magnitudes is near 1,

Furthennore, if Ji and di are negative, the response is oscillatory^ The case when both d]

and d2 are positive is the counterpart of the overdamped case in continuous time, with th e

impulse and step responses settling without oscillation.

472

Time and Frequency Characterization of Signals and Systems

Chap 6

20logioFHCeJ'"]

3jF
fl-

-i-Hte'n

Figure 6.3 f Cofttinueil

we In this section^

have restricted atlention to those causal first- and second-order

systems that are stable and for which the frequency response can be defined. In paniculai,

^ the causal system described by eq. (6.51) is unstable for a

1, Also, the causal ^iystem

\

I

^ described by eq. (6.56) is unstable if r

1, and that described by eq. (6.71) is unstable

if either \di \or\di\ exceeds 1.

6.7 EXAMPLES OF TIME- AND FREQUENCY-DOMAIN ANAL^IS OF SYSTEMS
Throughout this chapter^ we have illustrated the importance of viewing systems in both the
time domalti and the frequency domain and the importance of being aware of trade-offs in
the behavior between the two domain;*. In diis section, we illustrate some of these issues further. In Section 6.7.1 ^ we discuss these trade-offs for condnudus time in the context of an automobile suspension systeTn. In Section 6.7.2, we discuss an important class of
discrete-lime filters referred to as moving-average or noiu-ecursive systems.

Sec 6.7

Examples of Time- and Frequency-Domain Analysis of Syslems

21T

20 log,o [H(eJ-)|
- h 24 dB - r2o - -16
- 12 -&
-4
^ --12

iy *
2Tr

9 ='jr

473

6.7.1 Anafysis of an Automobile Scjspensjon System
A number of the points thai we have made concerning the chaiacteri sties anJ trade-i?ffs
in con tiiiuous -time systems can be illustrated in the intcrptetation of an automobile sus-
pension system as a lowpasA filter Figure 632 shows a diagrainmatic representation of a
simple suspension system camprised of a spring and dashpol (shock absorber). The roaJ surface can be thought of as a superposition of rapid small-amplitude changes in devaiion (iiigli frequencies)^ represenling Ihe roughness of the road suifaiceT and gradual c;hangeH in elevation (low frequencies) due to the general topography. The automobile stispensioti system is generally inteTided to fiUer out rapid variations in the ride caused by the road surface (i.e., the system acts as a bwpass filter).
The basic purpose of the su^jension system i^ to provide a smooth ride, and there i^ no sharp, natural division between the frequencies to be passed and those to be rejected.
Thus, it is reasonable to accept and, in fact, prefer a lowpass filter that has a gradual

4M
Ë^t) + yo

Time and Freflifency CharactflJ'izatian of Signals and Systems

Chap. 5

Chassis

Sprang,

Road
surface

Reterence elevation

Figure 6h32 O^agramrnatic representation of an automotive suspension sy^em. Here, >b represents the distance tHtween ttie chassis and the road
+ surface wtien ttie automodite is at rest y{t] y^ ttve position of ttie chassts
aE>ove the referer^^e eJevation^ and x{t) the elevation of the road above the reference eJevation.

transition from passbandto stopband. Furthermore* the time-domain characteristics of ihe system are important. If the impulse respotise or step response of the suspension systetii
exhibits ringing, then a large bump in the road (modeled as an impulse input) or a curb
(modeled as a step input) will result in an uncomfortable oscillatory response. In fact, a
common test for a suspension system is to ititroduce an excitation by depressing and then
releasing the chassis. If the response exhibits ringing, it is an indication that the shoct absorbers need to be repbced.
Cost and case of implementation al^o play an impcrtant role in the design of au-
tonnobile suspenfiion systems. Many studies ha\e been carried out to determine the mosi
desirable finequency-response characteristics for suspension systems from the poi nt of view
of passenger comfort. In situations where the cost may be warranted, such as for passenger
railway cars, intricate and costly suspension systems are used. For the automotive industry, cost is an important factor, and simple* less costly suspension systems are generally
used. A typical automotive suspension system consisL<; simply of the chassis connected to
the wheels through a spring and a dashpot. In the diagrammatic representation in Figure 6,32, >¨ represents the distance be-
tween the chassis and the road surface when the automobiie is attest, y{i) + yo^he position
of the chassis above the reference elevation, and x(t) the elevation of the road above the
reference elevation. The differential equation governing the motion of the chassis is then

^È^^,^^^,,,,,^,,,,,^,^-^^)

dt

dt

dt

(6.76)

M where is the mass of the chassis and k and ^ are the spring and shock absorber constants,

respectively. The frequency response of the system is

HiM) - (j<i>yM ^ bijc^) + k'
or

WUw) =
(;i^)2 + 2fw;,<£ + a>^'

(6.77)

Sec 6.7

Examples of Time- and Frequency-Domain Analysis of Systems

47 S

where

yA t <o,, =

and = 2^0.,.

As in Section 6.5.2, the parameter w^ is referred to as the undamped natural frequency and
A i as the damping ratio. Bode plot of [he log magnitude of the frequency response in eq.
(6.77) can be constructed by using first-order and second-order Bode plots. The Bode plot for cq. (6.77) is sketched in Figure 6,33 for several dtffemnt values of the damping ratio. Figure 6,34 illustFates the step response for fteverat different values of the damping ratio.
As we saw in Section 6.5.2, the filter cutoff frequency is controlled pricnanJy through
Wn, or equivalently for a chassis with a fished mass, by an appropriate choice of spring constant jt. For a given ai,,, the damping ratio is then adjusted through the damping factor b
associated with the ^hock asoibcr^. As the natural freqti^ckcy w,, is decreased, the liuspen:^LOn will tend to Hlter out slower road variations, thus providing a smoother nde. On the other hand, we see from Figure 6.34 that the rise time of the system increases, and thus the
system will feel more sluggish^ On the one band, it would be desirable to keep w^ small to
im^ovethe li^wpa.'is AJtenng; on the cthei hand, it would be desirable to have bin large for
a rapid time response. The^e, of course, are conilictin^ requirements and illustrate the need
far a trade-off between dme-domain and frequency-domain characteristics. Typically, a suspension system with a low value of Wn* so that the rise time is long, is characterized as 'soft*' and one with a high value of cun> so chat the rise tim^ is short, is characterized a^
""hard." From Figures 6.33 and 634, we observe also that, as the damping ratio decreases,
the frequency respense of the system cuts off more sharply, but the overshoot and rill-
ing i n the step response tend to increase, another trade-off between the ti me and frequency

lOto,
Figure 6.33 Bode plot for the maanitude Of the frequency response ot the
automobhle suspgnsiori system for several values of ttie damping ratio.

476

Timeartd Frequency Characterization or Signals and Systerr.s

:hap. 6

Figure 6.34 Step response of the automotive sjspen^ion system for vari-

U ous values of the damping ratic

= 01,0 2, 0.3, 04, 05, 0.6. 0.7, 08, 0.9,

1.0.1.2, 1,5,2.0,5,0).

domains. Geaerally, the stiock absorber damping is chosen to have a rapid rise time and yet iivoid overslwot and ringing. This choice coiresponds to the critically damped case, with ^ = 1.0, considered in Section 6.5.2,

6,7.2 Example; of Discrete^Time NonrecursJve Filteri
In Section 3.1 1, we introduced the two basic clas,':es of LTI filters described by ditference
equations, namely, recursive or infinite itnpulse response {UK) fihen; and nonrecursive or finite impulse response (FTR) fihers. Both of these classes of filters are of considerable
importance in practice and have their own advantaged and disadvantageSr For example,
recursive filters impleraented as interconnections of the firsr- and second-order systems described in Section 6.6 provide a fiexihie class of filters that can b& easily and efficientty
implemented and whose characteristics can be adjusted by varying the number and the parameters of each of the component first- and second-order subsystems. On the other hand, as shown in Problem 6.64, it is aot possible to design a causal, recursive filter with exactly linear phase, a property that we have seen is often desirable since, tn that case, the effect of the phase on the output signal is a simple time delay. In contrast, as we show in this section, iworecursive filters c<m have e^acdy linear phase. However, it is generally true that the same filter specificatioTis reqiiire a higher order equation and hence more coefficients and delays when implemented with a nonrecursive equation^ t;ompaTed with a recursive difference equation. Consequently, for FIR filters, one of the principal trade-off;* between the time and frequency domains isi that increasing the fie?iibiiity in spccifyitig thefreqtiency domain characteristics of the filter, incliiding, for eA^Jnlple. achieving a higher degree of frequency selectivity, requires an FIR filter with an impulse response of longer duration.
One of the most basic nonrecursive filters^ introduced in Section 3.11.2, is die
moving-average filter For this class of fillers, the output is the average of the values of the input over a finite window;

^^"^ ^ ^vTi^7;2:^/t" - ^]k = -f<t

(6.78J

Sec. 6-7

Examples of Time- and Frequency-Dorrain Analysis of Systems

477

The corresponding impulse response is a rectangular pulse, and the frequency response is

^ ^ N + M -^V

"
sinC(j/2)

in Figure 635, we show the log magnitude for*/ H-N+ 1 = 33 andM + A'-i^ i = 65.THe
main^ center lobe of each of these frequency responses corresponds to the cftective passband of the corresponding filter. Note that, as the impulse response increases in length, the width of the main lobeof the magnitudeof the frequency resporse decreaaes_ Thi^ provides

another example of the trade-off between the titnc and frequency domains. Specifically,

in order to have a narrower passband, the filter in eqs. (6.73) and (6.79) must have a longer impulse response. Since the length of the impulse response of an FIR filter has y

direct impact on the complexity of its implementation, this implies a trade-off l>etween frequency selectivity and the complexity of the filter, a topic of central concern in filter

design.

Moving" average filters are commonly applied in economic analysis in order to at-

tenuate the short-term fluctuations in a variety of economic indicators in relation to longer

term trends. In Figure 6.36, we illustrate the use of a moving-average filter of the form of

eq. (6.78) on the weekly Dow Jones stock market index for a lO-year period. The weekly

Dow JcMies index is shown in Figure 6, 36(a), Figure 6.36(b} is a 51-day moving aver-

N M age (ie-t =

= 25) applied to that index, and Figure 636(c) i$ a 201-day moving

N M ^ average (i.e.,

^ ItX)) applied to the index. Both moving averages are considered

useful, with the 51 -day average cracking cyclical [i.e., periodic) trends that occur during

the course of the year and the 201 -day average primarily emphasizing trends over a longer

time frame.
The more general form of a discrete-lime nonrecursive filter is

M so that the output of this filter can be thought of as a weighted average of ^ + + 1
neighboring points. The simple moving-average filter in eq. (6.78) then corresponds to
setting all of these weights to th e same value, namely, 1/(jV +3f + 1 ), However, by choosing these coefficients in other ways, we have considerable flexibility in adjusting the filter's

frequency response.

There are, in fact, a variety of techniques available for choosing the coefficients in

eq. (6.S0) so as to meet certain specifications on the fllier^ such as sharpening the transition

N+M+1 band as much as possible for a filter of a given ler^lh (i.e.^ for

^Jted). These pro-

cedures are discussed in detail iti a number of text^,^ and although we do not di^cu^;^ the

procedures here, it is worth emphasizing that they rely heavily on the basic concepts and
tools developed in this boot. To illustrate how adjustment of the coefficients can influence

^Scc. tot eitajtiple^ R. W. Hamming, Digital FUteri, 3nl ed. (Eing.lqwflnd Ctiffs. N]- PrenUce-H^II, Itk ,
V N A ] 989)^ . Oppenheim and R. W. Schattr. Discnrte-Timc Sif.ru2l Processing iEa^lzvfood Cliffi , J Ptcqucc-
Hal] Inc , J939), aodL. R. Rabinei and B Gold, Theor), an^ Appitccttt^tn ofOtgitdi StgnniPrzn c^-\sni^ ^tn^Ie-
wfW Cliffs, NJ' Frentice-Hall. lac, lTi5l

478

Tlmfland Frequency Characterization of Sionals and Systems

Chap, 6

OdB-

fV

P 40 VYVYYVYY^ "Cffif

m fVW\ AA

(YT\

(a)

-120

-Trf2

it/2

OdB ^

^ AommtmnimMi^

Ijnnnnf^^

it>)

-120

-TT

-tt/2

Tr/2

Figure 6,35 Lfig-mapiiitude pJots for the moving-avoragQ filter of ec]$.

M W + + (6.781 and (6.79J 1or (a) \f + + 1 = 33 and (t£)

A 1 = 65.

M \hcre&ponscofthefilicr,le^usconaideiafilteroftyieformofeq.(6.80), withiV =

= 16

and the filter coefficients chosen to be

b, =

siD(27rA/33)
.
jTk
0,

^ [Jt|

32

> \k\ 32

(6.81)

^

Sec. 67

Examples of Time- and Frequency-Domain Analysis of Systems

400

350 30O

i^A
,

JA

ZOO 150 f^^"* 100
50

V

\

-^

\(^J

^
^'^^

Jon Jen
1*27 l&W

Jen ISZS

Jan 1930

1
Jon 1931

Jhi Jan
IMS 1933

^Ja^l
1K4

Jhi 1^35

Jbt 1936

Jen 1907

400

r-^

350

f\

30Q

^\

250

j

rf
200 r^

Z^

tM

too

'X
\^

\\
\

^^
y^

\--

^ f^^

ArJ

1

479

Jon Jsi 19?7 1929

Jan 1929

Jan 1930

4tn T901

Jar 1932

Jan 19S3

Jsr\
1*54

Jan 1315

Jbo IflK

JUn 1937

4oa

"

r"--

350

f\\

/

'-^

^ ^ ^/

\\

^k

V > X" _^

50

^ ^ f^
¨y

Jar 1S?7

Jan 192ft

Jaa 1930

Jan 1331

Jwi 19S2

Ja-t Tfi33

Jan 1934

Jv> 1S3&

J¨
1938

Jan 1937

Figure 6.36 Effect of lowpass filtaring on the Dow Jones woehly stock

market indax over a 10-year period

using moving-iv^rag^ filters: (a) weekly

% index;

51 -day moving average ap^

plied to (a); (c) 201 -da/ moving

aeJerage appiLed to (aV Tt^e w&ekly

stock market indeix and the two mavrng

averages are discrete-time sequences

For clarity In the graphical display,

tlie thres $¨queix;es ire shewn he'e

with their inditddual values connected

b^ straigtTt lines to form a continuous

tirve.

480

"TJmeand Frequency Cfiaracterization of Signals and Systems

Chap. 6

The impulse response of the filter is

h[n] =

^iti(2Trn/33^
TTH
0,

^ in\

32

> \n\

32

(6.82)

Comparing this impulse response with eq. (6.20), we see that eq, (6.R2) corresponds tP tnincatingt ft>7 |n[ > 32, the iTvpulse response for the ideal kiwpass fiUer wiili cutoff frequency ttft = 2ir/33.

In geneial, the coefficients b^ can be adjusted so that the cutoff is at a desired fre-

quency. For the example shown in Figure 6 J7, the cutoff frequency was chosen to match

M approximately the cutoff frequency of Figure 6,35 for A' --

= 16^ Figure 6,37Ca) shows

the impulse response of the filter, and Figure 6.37(b> shows the Ic^ magnitude of the fre-

quency response in dB. Comparing this frequency response to Figure 6.35, we observe

^me that the passband of die filter has approxinuitely the

width, but that the transition to

h(nj

2 5^

^i

I*"

3tt

tf

TT

3ti

TT

T6

16

16

a

16

4

Co

^\

Figure 6.37 {a) Impulse response for the nonrecursive ftlter ^\ eq. (6,82); (b) log magnitude of the frequerKiy respond of th¨ fllteJ'-

Sec 67

Examples of Time- and Ffequency-Domain Aral^is Of Systems

4a 1

the stopband is sharper. In Figures 6.3R(a) and (b). the magnitudes (on a linear amplitude
stale) i)f the two filters are shown for comparison. It should be clear from the comparison of the two examples that, by the intelUgent choice of the weighting coefficienb, the
transition band can be sharpened. An example of a higher order lowpa^s filter (jV = A/ =
125), with the coefficients determined through a numerical algorithm referred to as the
Paries -McClelian algorithm,'* is shown in Figure 6.39. This again illustrates the trade-off
N + between the time and frequency domains: If we increase the length + ^f 1 of a filter,
then, by a judioious choice of the filter coefficienti in eq. (G.ftO), we can achieve sharper transition band behavior and a greater degree of frequency selectivity.
An important property of the examples we have gi ven is that they all have Mrc> or 1 in -
ear phase characteristics. For example, the phase of the moving-average filter of eq. <6.79)
is w[(Af - M)/2]. Also, since the impulse response in eq. (6.32) is ital and even, the im-
puhe response wf the filter described by that equation i? real and even, and thus has zero
phase. From the symmetry properties of the Fourier triinsform of real signals, we know that any nonrecursive filter with an impulse response that h real and even will have a frequency response //(e^'^) that is real and even and, consequently, has zem phase. Such a < filter, of course^ is noncau^sal, since its impulse response h[n] has nonzero values for a 0.
However, if a causal filter is required, then a simple change in the impulse response can achieve this, resulting in a system with linear phase. Specifically, since h[n] is the impulse response of an FIR filter, it is identically zero outside a range of values centered at the origin

Fig'jre6.30 Comparison, on a
linear anrtplitude sc¨l¨, of the frequency rEsponse^ of {a) Rgure 6.37 and
(b) figure 635.
* A. V: OppciLheim and R, W, Schafcr, Discrete-Tinu- Signal Piocessing (EnglewoodClifTs, NJ- Prentice-
HalMnc, I98^>, Chap,?.

482

Time and Frequency Charactsnzation a! SiQfials and Systems

utiap. 6

TI

Figure 6,39 Ltwpass nonrecursjve filter tflth 251 cosfijcients designed to odtarnth^ sharped possible cutoff.

> - (i.e., A[n] for all |n| N). If wc now define the nonrecursive LTI system resulting

from a simple N-step delay of h[n]^ i.e^,
n hdn] = h[n-

(6.S3)

< then h^[n] = for all n 0, so that this LTI system is caiasal. FurthearmDre, ftcim the tinw-
shift property for di^rete-time Fourier transforms, we see that the frequency response of
the system is

//i(eJ*^) ^ H{e^ne~^'"^.

(6.84)

Since Hie^'^) has zer& phase, H\i^'*^) does indeed have linear phase.

6,8 SUMMARY

In this chapter* we have built on the foundation of Fourier analysis of signals and systems

developed in Chapters 3-5 in order to exajnine in more detail the characteristics -of LTI

systems arvd the effects they have on signals. In particular, w& have takeo a careful look at

the magnitude and phase characteristics of sigiwls and systems, and \ve have introduced

We log-m^goicude and Bode plots for LTI systems.

have also discussed the impact of

phase and phaj;e distortion on signals and i^ystems. This examination led us to understand

the special role played by linear phase characteristics* which impart a constant delay at all

frequencies and which, in turn, led to the concept of nonconstant group delay and disper-

sion associated with systems having nonlinear phase characteristics. Using diese tools and

insights, we took another look at frequency-,selective filters and the time-frequency (rade-
offs involved. We examined the properties of both ideal and non -ideal frequency-selective

fihei^s and saw that time-frequency considerations, causality constraints, and implemen-

tation issues frequently make non -Ideal Alters, with transition bands and tolerance limits in d^ passhands and stopbands, the preferred choice.

Chap. 6 Problems

463

We also esamined in detail the ttme-frequency characteristics of first- and second-

We order systems in both continuous and discrete time.

noted in particular the trade-off

between the response lime of these systems and the frequency-domain bandwidth. Since

first- and second-order systems are the bui Jding blocks for more complex, higher order LTI

systems, the insights developed for those basic systems are of considerable use in practice.

Finally, we presented several examples of LTI systems in order to illustrate many of

the points developed in the chapter. In particular, we examined a simple model of an ^to-

mobile suspension system to provide a concrete example of the time-res pons e-frequency-

resporise concerns tlut drive system design in practice. We also considered several

examples of discrete-time nonrecursive filters, ranging from simple moving- average

We filters to higher order FIR filters designed to have enhanced frequency selectivity.

saw, in addition, thai FIR filters can be designed so as to have exactly linear phase. These

examples, the development of the tools of Fourier analysis diat preceded them, and the

insights those tools provide illustrate the considerable value of the methods of Fotirier

analjsis in analyzing and designing LTI systems.

Chapter 6 ProbJems
The firet section of problemii belongs to die hosic category, and the answers are provided in the back of the book. The remaining two sections contain problems belonging lo
the basic and advanced categories, respectively
BASJC PROBLEMS WITH ANSWERS
6,1, Consider a continuous-time LTI system with frequency response ffijw) = |//(yw>|^^'^f^^' and reaJ impulse response hit). Suppose thac we apply an input x(t) = cos((Uof + (^) to diis system. The resulting output can be sho^n to be of the
form
MO = AxU - JoX
where A is a normegative real number representing an amplmde-scaling factor and
/o i^ a time delay.
A (a) Express in terms of |//(jw<])|.
(b) Express fy in terms of <HiJtiif^).
6-2, Consider a discrete-time ITI system with frequency response Hie^*^} = \Hie^'")\e''^"^'''''> and real impulse response h[n\. Suppose that we apply the input -T[n] ^ sin(o>on + 0o) to this system. The resulting out^mt can be shown to be of
the form

provided that <H(È^'^'^') and wt> are related in a particular way. Etetemiine this rela-
tionship.
63. Consider the following frequency response for a causal and stable LTT system:
H{ju>) = 1 - Jo>
\ -\- JUf'

484

Tjine and frequency Charactereation 3f Sjgnals and Systens

Chap. 6

(fl) Show that |//Ofci)| - 4, and determine the value of A.

{h} E>etertnine which of the following statements is true about t(w), the grotjp delay
of the system. <N(?fe,T(ij/) = -- d{<Hi J w))}dw, where <A/(ytJj) is expressed

in a form that does not eotitain any discontinuities.)

1. T(cuJ = Ofor&j >

2. t(w)> Oforw >0

w > < 3. Tito)

for

<iA Oirsider a discreie-ljme IJTI system witii frequency respctise Mii^'''*) and real impulse resfH>nse h[n]. The groiip delay function for such a systeTii is defined as

where <H(fJ'^) has no discontinuities. Suppose that, for this system.

= = \H(e*'''^)\

2, <//(f>^)

0, and rf^ 1 = 2.

Determine the output of the svstem for each of the following inputs:

(fl) co&(^n)

p (b) sin(^M'+

6-S. Consider a continuous- time ideaJ bandpass filter whose freqni^nty resp"n*;e is

(a) If hit) is (he impulse resp&nse of this filter, detertnirte a function g{t\ <,iich thai

(h ) As fu ^ is increased, does the i nipu Ise response o f the fi Iter ge I more cone en trated
or less concentrated about the origin?
6.6. Consider a discrete-time ideal highpa^ss filter whose frequency response is .specified
as

Hun = [ '
[ [},

- '^ 1". ^ ki ^ 'T

< -- \m

':t

(lit^

(a) }fh[n] is the impulse respsnse of thjs filter, detentiine a function ^[n] such that

(b> Asftj ^ is increased, dties the irr^puLse response of the filter gel more cuncentrated
or less concentrated about the origin?
A 6.7. continuous time lowpaiiij filter has been designed with a passband frequency of
1 rOOO Hz, a stopband frequency of 1 ^200 Hz, passbard ripple of 0, 1 , and stopband
We npple of 0-05. Let the impulse response of this lowpass filter be denoted by h(f).
wish 10 convert the filter into a bandpass filter with i.mpulse response
^(0 - 2hit)cos{^,OOOm).

Chap, 6 Probletns

485

> Assuming that \H(Jcii)\ is negligible for |a>| 4,000ir, answer the following ques-
tions:
(a) If the passband ripple for the bandpass filter i& constrained to be 0. 1, what are the tvno passband frequencies associated with the bandpass filter?
(b> [f the stoplxind ripple for the bandpass filter is conslrained to be 0.05, what are the two stopband frequencies associated with the bandpiass filter?
A 6^. causal, nontdeal lowpass filter is designed with frequency response H(e^'^). The
difference equation relating the input x[n} and output y[n] for this fitter is specified
as

The filter also satisfies the following specifications for the magnitude of its frequency response:
pa ssband frequency = otp, passband tolerance ^ dp, stopband frequency = w^,
stopband tolerance =^ S^.
Now consider a causal LTI system whow inpui and output are related by the differ-
ence equal! c?n
>t"l ^ 2^-l)Vy[/i- k]-^^('l)''htx[n- kl
Show that this filter has a passband with a tolerance of 5^, and specify the con:e-
sponding location of the passband.
6*9, Con&ider a continuous-time causal and stable LTI system whose input i{t) and output }'(r) are related by the differential equation
^ + 5y(0 = 2.(0.
What is the final value i(=c) of the step response s{t) of this fiker? Also, determine
the value of In for which
-i sM = s{ti)}
6JO, For each first-order system whose frequency response is as folbws, specify ;he straight-line approximation of the Bode magnitude plot'
6AI. For each second-order system whose frequency response is as follows, specify the straight-line approximation of the Bode m^nitudc plot:
(^> GSFtIWz! C) 0.02 ^^,^^^Ý15-^

48 &

Time aneJ frequency Ctiaracten^ion of Signals and Systems

Chap. 6

6£12* A continuous-time LTI system S with frequency response Hijdi) is constructed by
cascading two continuoiis-time LTI systems with frequency responyes H]{jfi)) and ^2(J<^)* vespectively. Figures E*6.12(a) and P6.12<b) show the straight-line apprax-
imations of the Bode magninwk plots o^Hiijdt) and H{jat)^ respectively. Specify

aOloQiolHilwJl
24 dB
20 da/decade

-20 dB/decade

6dB

at (rad/sec)

20IOfl,n|H(j(.f:

-20<JB

-40 dB/d9cade

1 00

w frad/sec)

Figure P&.f 2

6*13, The straight-line approximation of the Bode magnitude plot of a second-order C\5ntimous-iime LTI system S is shown in Figure P6*13, S Tn<ty be eotiatnicieil by

È0 log,o Hfio^H I 6dB

-20 dB/decade

26 dB

,

-40 dB/decade

eo 1 tio

*£ (rad^&dcj

Figure P6.T3

Chap, 6 Problems

48?

either tr^mneLtin^ t^o first- order s^stem^; Si and S^ in ca^adc t>r tw^ firsi-nrdeT
systems S\ and S4 in parallel, Detennine which. ifariT, (?f the following slati^menth liTe true or false. Justify your a.ns\ver*.
(a) The frequency responses of S\ and 5^ may be determined uniquely. ib) The frequenty responses of Sy and 5^ may be detcnnined uniquely.
6.14. The straight-line approximation of the Bode magnitude plot of a causal and stable ctiniinuous-time LTI systeai S i^ shown in Figure P6AA. Specify the frequency re-
sponse of a system that i^ the inverse of 5.

20log.olHtjo-)l

30de - -

dG/decadÈ

^i2dB

w fratJ/sec) Figure P6. T 4

6.15, For each of the following feecnnd-order difFeretitial etiuations ftir causal and sta-

ble LTt systems, deteroiine whether the corresponding impulse response is under-

^ damped, overdampedt or critically damped

(aj

+ 4^1^ + 4 v(0 ^ Mr)

(b)

(d)

+ 4^^5,(,) = 7^(,)^IlJ--f(p^>

A 6.16* particular firsl-order causal and stable diserete-time LTI system has a step re-

sponse whose maximum overshiXJl is 50% of its final value. If the final value is 1,

^d determine a difference equation reUtios the input ;f[¨|

output yln] of this filler.

6. 1 7, Foi each of the following second-order difference equations for causal and stabie LTI

systems, determine whcthtjr or not the step response of the system is oscillatory:
xM (a) y\n] + y[n - y\+ ^yln - 2] =

^M (b) y[n\ - - y[7i 1] + ly[n ~ 2J -

RC 6,1S£ Consider the continuous-time LTI system implemented as the

circuit shown in

Figure P6.IS. The voltage source j(if) is considered the input to this systetn. The

voltage y{t) across the capacitor is considered the system output. Is it possible for

the step response of the system to have an oscillatory behavi<}r?

4aa

Ttme and Freqjency Characterization of Signals and Systems

Chap. 6

Figure P&.18
6A% Consider the continuous-time LTl system implemented as the RLC circuit shown
in Figure P6J9. The voltage source ^(0 is considered the input to this system The
voltage y{t) across the capacitor is considered the system output. How should R, L,
C and be related so that there is no oscillation in the step response^
AVvV yrmr^

6 Kfi>

V(t)

o Figure P6.T 9
6^0. Consider a nynrecursive fiUer with the impulse response shown in Figure P6.20. What is [he ^roup delay as a function of frequency for this filter?

^_A *

3
i>

\^
l' .'

12 3

4

Figure PA. 20

BASIC PROBLEMS

6.21. A causal LTI filter has the frequency response H(j<a) shown in Figure P6.2L For

each of the input signals given below, determine the filtered output signal v<f),

= (a) x{t)

>'

(c) KUto) =

\

(b) x{i) ^ (sinwoOwC/)
^ (d) X(ju} = JW

Cf>ap. 6 Proi3lenr>s

489

Figure P6 .21

6,22. Shown in Figiire P6.22(a) is ihe ftiequency response W(jtif) of a continuous-time

filter referred to as a lowpass difFerentiator For each of the input sign^s ^(/) below,

detennine the filtered output signal y(r).

(a) xit) = cGsH^i + 6)

= (b> jc(r)

cos(4Trf + 8)

(c) x(t) is a half-wave rectified sine ;wave of period,, as sketched in Figure P6. 22(b).

xm =
0,

^ m (m + 7 )

^ ^ nt for any integer

!H(i(^M

^<^

-3.

3^

4H(ial1
-3i
,,JL

(a)

*(l)
n z:\_1-^^ /

fb)

Flgune P6 .22

6u23. Shown in Ptgure P6^23 is {//(jÈb£)| for a lowpass Alter. Determine and sketch ttie
impulse response of the filter for each of the following phase characteristics:
(St) <HUio) =
(h) <Hijfi}) = a^r£ where r is a constant

490

Time and Frequency Characterization of Signals and Systems

Ctiap. 6

H(H I

tlt^

Ol Figure P6.23

(c) <JJHj^) =

6.24. QmsidtJT a continuous- time lowpass iilter whose impulse response hit) is known to be real and whose frequency response magnitude is given as.
mjM - 1, 0. otherwise

(a) L^etermine and bkeUh the real-valued impulse responine h{0 for this filter v,h^n

the correspond irg group delay functior^ is specified as:

= <i) T(u>J

5

= <ii) T(w)

Ï

(lil) T(w) = -I

(b) If the impulse response ^<0 had not been specified to be real, would knowl-

edge of \H{J(o}\ and t^w) be sufTicient \o determine h{t) uniquely? Ju^iify your

answer.

6.25. By computing the group delay al two selected frequent;ies, verify thai each tf the

following frequency responses has nonlinear phase.

(a) HO) =

(b) /^f>) =

(c) HiM) =

6*26* Consider an ideal hjgiipass tiltcr whose trequericy response is specified as

HU<^) -

1.

|W| -^ ((>È

0, otherwis^e

(a) DetciTHjne the impuL-^e response h{f) tor this filter.
(b) As t>, is increased^ does hit) gel more or less cencentrated abf>ut the origin? <c) Determine i<0) and ii'^'h where sit) is the step response of the filter. 6*27£ The output yit) of a causa3 LTI system us related no the input xU) by the differential
equation
dyU)
- ^ 2yu) = x(il
di
(aj Determine the frequency response

JJ"1£ = J"-:-
of the syscena, and sketch its Bode plot,
(b) Specify^ as a function of frequency, the group delay associated with this sy itenn,
(c> If ji\t) = ^~'m(0* determine Yijd)), the Fourier transform of the output.

!

Chap. 6 Problems

491

(d) Ui>ing the technique ofpanial-fnctionejcpatisiofi, determine the output yu) for
theinpiit x(r> in p4iTt(c).
(e) Repeat pans (c) and (d), first if the mpnt has as its Pourier transform
(i) xu^)--^^,

then if
(u) X(M, = fti^,

and finally, if
(iii> xij^) = ^È^^^^

6*28- (a) Sketch die Bode plots for the following frequency responses:

(i)

1 +(yfti/iC£

(ji) 1 -OWIO)

(iA) I + j<w + {jd^r

(X) 1 - j(i> + (yw)^

^^'^

> + jw 00 f C^¨^v 1

-^

E

)]J

f (

1-

I)

(b) I>ettrminc and sketch the impulse response and the step response tor the sys-

tem with frequency response (iv). Do the same for the system with frequency

response (viV
The system given in (iv) is often referred to as a non-^minimum-phase system^ wKile the sysiem specified in i\\) is referred tn as being a minimum phas^. The correAponding impulse responses of (iv) and (vi) are referred u> as a non -minimum-phase signal and a rn^ni mum-phase signal, respectively. By comparing the Bode plots of these two frequency responses, we can see that

they have identical magnitudes; however, the magnitude of the pha.^ic of the

system of <iv) is larger than for the system of (vi).
We tan also note differences in the time-domain behavitir of the two sys-

terns. For example, the impulse response of the mini mum-phase system has
more of its energy concentrated near t = Q dian does the impxiLse response of
the non-minimum-phase system. In addition, the step response of (\\ ) mittally
has the opposite liign from its asymptotic v^iie as r --^ cc, while this i^ not the
case fc3r the system of (vi).

The important concept of minimum- and non-mimmum-phafte systems

can be extended to more general LTI systems than the simple first-order systems
we have treated here, and the distinguishing characteristic* of these fiy stems can be described far more thoronghSy than we have done,

6*29, An LTl system is said to have pha^e ierid at a particular frequency qj ^ u^'^ if > <//(ycoo) 0. The terminology stem'; from the fact that if e^"^"' is the mput to

this system, then the phase of the output will exceed, or lead, the phase of the input.
< Similarly, if <HUt^i}} 0, the system is yaid to have phase lag at this frequency.
Note that the system with fiequcncy response

1
1 -^ JbJT

492

Time and Frequency Characterization of Signals and Systems

Chap. 6

> has phase lag for all cu 0, while the system with frequency response

1 + ;wr

w has phase lead for all > 0.
(a) Construct the Bode plots foe the following two systems. Which has pha.sc lead and which phase lag? Also, which one amplifies signals at cettaiti fiequencies?

(i>

I -I- lOjtit

<ii)

l-t-LJj^

(b) Repeat part (a) for the following three frequency responses:

(iii)
6,30, Let x{t) have the Bode plot depicted in Figure P6.30. The dashed lines in the figure represent straight-line approximations. Sketch the Bode plots for 10^(100-

OdBh
^ -40
I -60 S 'SO -

1000

-tOOQ
6,31* An integrator has as its frequency response

Figcire Pfr,30

= wheie the impulse at cu

is a result of the fact that the integration of a constant

input from f -- -- ¨ results in an inftnile outpcit. Thus, if we avoid inputs that are

Ctiap. 6 Prabiein^
> constant, or e^quivatently, only examine H(jat) far ci> 0, ^e sec that
20logj//0¨)| = -203og(¨),

493

In other ivords, the Bode plot for an integrator, as illustrated in Figure P6.3 1 , coas]ÈCÈ of two straight-line plots. These plots reflect the principal characteristics of an inte-
-- grator : a phase shift of 90^ at all positive va] ues of freguetKy and the ampElhcation
of li>w frequencies.
A (a) useful, simple model of an electric motor is an LTI system with input ^ual to
the applied voltage and output given hy the motor shaft angle. This system can be visualized a& the cascade of a stable LTI system (with the v^Uage as input and shaft angular velocity a^ output) and an integrator (representing the Integmtion of the angular velocity). Often^ a model of first-order system is used for the first part of the cascade. Assuming, for example^ that this first-order system has
a time constant of 0. 1 second, we obtain an overall motor frequency response of

-
RguK P631

49+

the form

Time and FreqLsncy Characterization o1 Sigruls and Systems

Chap. 6

Sketch the Bode plot foe the system forit> > 0.001

<b) Sketch the Bode plot for a differentiator,

(c) Do the saine for systems with the following freqaenty responses:

= Ci) H(yaj)

_JN^ l+joj/lOO

(ii) HOW) = a-fjwV]tn-(j^LHj-/ioti^

6*3i, Consider the system depicted in Figuie P6,32. This "compensator" box is a continu-

oui-time LTI system.

(a> Suppose that it is desired to choose the frequency response of the compensalor so

that the overall frequency response //(jtw) of the cascade satisfied the follnwing

two conditions:
= 1. The iog TTiagnitude of ff(jtt>y has a slope of --40 dB/decade beyond <ij

1000.
< 2* For < nj 1,000, the log magnitude of H(Jfii) should be between
-lOdBandiDdB.

Design a suitable compensator (that is, determine a frequency response for a

compensator that meets the preceding requirements), and draw the Bode plot

for the resulting H(jii)).

(b) Repeat (a) if the specifications on the log magnitude of H(j(ti) are as follows:
1. Jt should have a slope of +20 dB/decade for Q < tu < 10.
2. It should be between +10 and +30 dB tor 10 < to < 100.
< < 3. It should have a slope of -20dB/decade for lOO ti^ l.LKK). w 4. Jt should have a slope of -40 dB/decade for > l^OOO.

Mt)-

Compensator

^
iai + 50

y(t)
l^igure P6.3Z

6,33£ Figure P6.33 shows a system commonly used to obtain a highpa>!s filter from a
lowpa^fi filter and vice versa.
(a) Show that> if ^(j^) is a lowpass filter with cutoff frequency attp^ the overall
system corresponds to an ideal highpass filter. Determine the system's cutoff frequency and sketch its impolse response,
<l)) Show that, if Hijto) is an ideal highpass filter with cutoff frequency cJ^^, the
overall system corresponds to an ideal lowpass tilter, and determine the cutoff frequency of the system. (c> if the intercontiection of Figure P6.33 is apphed to an ideal discrete-time lowpas* filter, will the resulting system he an ideal discrete-time highpass filter?

Figune P6.33

CiMp. 6 Problems

495

<i.34_ In Problem 6.33, wt considered a system commonly used to obtain a highpass filter froin a lowpass filter and vice versa. In this problem, we explore the system further
and, in particular, consider a potential difficulty if the phase ofHijttt) is rot properly chosen. (a) Referring to Figure P6.33, let us assume that tlijw) is real and as shown in
Figure P6-34. Then

< \ -di < Hijw^)

+ 1

5],

^ w ^ w],

Determine and sketch the r&5uldng frequency responi^e of the overall $ystem of Figure P6.33, Does the resulting system correspond to an approximation to a highpa&s filter?
(W Now let HiJ(i>) in Figure F6,33 be of the fomi

HUa>) ^ /f|Ow>e^*^"\

(P6J4-1:

where H\{Jtt>y is identical to Figure P6.34 Mid 9{it)) is an unspecified phase characteristic. \Hi^th H(.J<a) in this more general forai, does it still correspond to an approximation to a lowpass filter? (c) Without making any assumptions atxiut BitaX determine and sketch the tolerance limits on the magnitude of the frequeiKy response of the overalJ system of Figure P6J3.
(d) UH{jto) in Figure P6J3 is an appcoidmation to s. lowpass fiher with uttspcc-
ified phase characteristics, will the overall system in that figure necessarily correspond to an approjumadon to a highpass filter?

HH
1+fi
I'&i

F\guw P6.34
6J5, Shown in Figure P6, 3 5 is the frequency response H{e^) of a discrete-time differ-
entiator. EJetermine the output signal y[n] as a function of ftj^ if the input x[n\ is
x{n] = + caslttiQn &'\.

¨

496

Time and Fre<}uency Characterization of Signals and Systems

Cliap. 6

H(e'^|

<uii& |u^

-! Figure P6.35

636. Consider a di^crete-titne Lowpa^s filter whose Lm|HiLse re^pocise h[n] is known to be

^ real and whose frequency response magnitude in tt^e region -TT

^ tit

77 is given

as:

\ff(.^n\ =

^

[ ^; otherwise

Determine and sketch the real-valued impulse response h[ri\ far this filter when the

corresponding group delay furtction is specified as:

(a) r(w) = 5

<b) T(ot) = Ï

(c> tC^)) = -|

6.37, Consider a causal LTL system whose frequertcy response is given ^s:

1 - y-^'
(a) Show that |//(*J")] ia unity at all frequencies, (b> Show that

<Hie^'^) - -w - 2 tan -I

^ sin<c£

1 - 5 C05

(t) Show that the group delay for this filter is given by

T(ij) =

" ^

C05 ii>

Sketch T\<x>).
(d) V/hsK i$ die output of this filter when the input is cos( jrt)?
^ 6*J(i* Consider an ideal bandpass filter whose frequency response in the region -it m ^ TT is specified as

Hie^"^) =

1.

-- S S ^ tUf

|uj|

+ ^

Ctff

Q, otherwise

Chap, 6 Problertia

497

Delenrkine and sketch the Impulse iiesponse h[ti\ tor this lilter when

(b) ^r - ^ (c) <^, = f
As titf IS increased, does h[n] get more or less concentrated about the t^rigin?

6*39*

Sketch the log magnitude and phase of each of the foUowing frequency responses.

+ (a) 1

i^ j<^

(b) 1 ->-2f J^

(c) 1 - le-J*^

-

I ffie ''

1

(f)

is)
(i)

]
(J)

6^* Consider an ideal discrete-time lowpass ftlter \vith impulse respon&e h[Ti\ and for
m which the frequency response Hie^'^) ts thai shown Figure P6.40. Let us consider
obtaining a new filter with impulse response h\ [n] and frequency response Hi (c^")
A& follows:

This corresponds to inserting a sequence value of zero between each sequence value

^d of h[n]. Determine

sketch /f|(tf^") and state the class of ideal filters to which it

belongs (e.g., lowpass, highpass, bandpass, multiband, etc.).

H(e^)

<H(*J")=0

C

^-2'.

**c

*i>c

IT

air ¨ Fgure F^.^O

6Ah A particular causal LTl system is described by the diffHsnence equation

y[n] -

^J>lTn -

+ 1]

1
-^y[n

- 2]

=

x[nj-

x[n -

1].

(a) Find the impulse response of this system. (b) Sketch the log magnitude and the phase of the frequency response of the system, 6j42> i^) Consider two LTI systems ^ith the following frequ&ncy responses;

4?8

Time and Fr^qu^ncy Characterization dI Signals and Systems

Chap. 6

Show that both of these frequency responses have the same magnitude function [},G..\H[{e^'^)\ = |H2(W'*')]J. but the group delay of //j^e^") IS greater than the
> group delay afHiief''') for to 0.
(b) Etetermine and sketch the impulse and step responds of the iwo systems.
(c) Show that

= where Gie^^} is an ail-pctss system [i.e., IGC^^*^)!

1 for all ct^].

6.43. When designing filters with highpass or bandpass characteristics, it is nften conve-

nient first to design a lowpass filter with the desired passband and stopband specifi-

cat]un$ (ind then to transfonn this prototype titter Co the desired highpass or bandpass

filter. Such transform^tionii are called lowpaji^-to-highpa.^ or highp^sA to lowpuN^

transfoimations. Designing filters in this manner is convenient because it requires

us only to formolate our filter design algorithms for the class of filters with low-
pass characteristics. A^ one example of such a procedure, consider s. discrete-time

lowpass filter with impulse response hh^{n\ and frequency response Hi^ie'^), as

sketched in Figure P6,43, Suppose the itnpulse response is modulated with the se-
quence(-l>" to obtain /(hp[rt] - (-l)"ft|p[n].

(a) Determine and sketch H^ple^*^ ) iti terms &f H\p(e^"). Show in particular that, for

^ip(^''^) as showt^ in Figure P6.43, //hp(^^") corresponds to a highpass filter
(b) Show that modulation of the impulse response of a discrete-time highpass filter by (--1)" will transform it to a lowpass filter.

1

-2n

2ti

Figure P6.43

644, A discrete-time system is impletnented as shown in Figure P6,44. The system S
shown in the figure is an LTI system with impulse response /iip[n]. (a) Show that the overall system is time invariant. (b) If ft|p[rt] is 9. lowpass filter, what type of filter does the system of the figure
implement?

(-1)"

*YxJ ^vhi

(-1)"

Figure P6.+4

)

Chap. 6 Problems

499

6.45. Consider the following three frequency responses for causa) and stable third-order
LTI systems. By utilizing the properties of first- and secoiMi-order systems dis-
cussed in Section 66, determine whether or not the impulse respons^e of each of the third-order systems is oscillatory. {Note: You should be able to answer this question without taking the inverse Fourier transforms of the frequency responses of the
third'Order *>ystems

I

(1-

\e-^^)a-

3y"-J^K/^i^

-

y-^*-)
4^

1
>V (1 + |^-J^^)(1 - 5^-J¨)(l - ^e

(1 - ^^-'"^Xl - ^e-J^ + ^^"^^)

6.46, Consider a causal, nonrecursive (FIR) iih&r whose real-valued impulse response

^ h[n] i& zero for ff

A^.

M (at Assuming that - is cidd, shciw that if h[n} is symnoetric about (A^ l)/2 (i.e., if

h[{N - 1V2 + nl = hl(N - 1)^ - n]>, then

AM where

We is a real-valued function of ^.

concltide that the filter has Unear

phase.

(b) Give an example of the impulse response k[n] of a causal, linear-phase FTR

> filter such that h[n\ = for ¨ 5 and h[n] ^QfoiO ^ n ^ 4.

(c) Assuming that jV in even, show that if ftln] is symmetric about (A^ - 1 )/2 fi.e,,

-n- if ft[(W2) + n] = h\N{2

1]), then

where Ada) is a real-valued function of oi. (d) Give a*i example of the impulse response ft[nj of a causal, linear-phase FIR
fsUer such that /f[n] - for n a^ 4 and /i[n] =?^ for :^ n =e 3.
A 47* three-point symmetric moving average, referred to a$ a weighted moving average,
is of the form

y[n\ = b{ax[n - + I] x[n] + Èix\n + 1]},

(P6.47-1)

(ai Determine, as a. function of a and fr, the frequency response f/(c-"^ > of the threepoint moving average in eq. (P6.47-1).
(b) Determine the scaling factor b such thatHC^-'") has unity gain at zero fi^uency.
(c) In many time-serie$ analysis problemSn a common choice for the coeffici&nt a in the weighted moving average in eq. (P6.47-1) i& n = 1/2 Determine and
sketch the frequency response of the resulting filter.
6*48, Consider a four-point, moving-averag&, discrete-time filter for which the difference
equation is

+ y[n] = bi}X{n] ip,A[n - IJ -I- b2x[n -2] + h^x[n - 2J.

500

Time and Frequency Chara^erii^tion of Signals and S/atsins

Cnap 6

Determine and sketch the magnitude of the frequency response for eacti of the fol-

lowing tascsr

^ - (a) h^i = &3 = O.bi

= ^ (b) hi

b2 -^ 0, hyi

bi

(c) b(f = h\ = b2 = h^

= (d) b{} = -b\

bi = -b:^

ADVANCED PROBLEMS
6.49, The time constat^t provides a mcasurie of how fast a first-order system responds to
inpuLs. The idea of measuring the speed of response of a system is also important for higher order systems, and in this problem we investigate the extenj^ion of the time
constant to such systenns. (a) Recall that the time constant of a first-order systetn with impulse response

is 1/a, which is the amount of time from r = that it takes the system step

= r&sponse i(0 to settle within \/e of its final value [i.e,, 5(¯^)

limf_£p>s<0]

Using this same quantitative definition, find the equation that must be solved in

order to deteirnine the time constant of the causal LTl system described by the

differential equation

n-^ ~d^ +

+ lOyit) = 9x{t).

(P6.49-1)

(b) As can be seen from part (a)> if we use the precise definition of the time constant set forth there, we obtain a simple expression fof the tirtie constant of a firstorder system, hut the calculations are decidedly more complex for the system of eq. (P6 49-1), However, show that this system can be viewed as the parallel interconnection of two first-order systems. Thus, we usually think of die sjistem of eq. (P6,49-l) as having two time constants, corresponding to the two firstorder factors. TATiat are the two time constants for this system'
<c) The discussion given in part (b) can be directly generalized to all systems with
impulse responses that are linear combinations of decaying exponentials. In any system of this type, one can identify the dominani time constants of the system, which are simply the largest of the time constants. These represent the slowest parts of the system response, and consequently, they have tbe dominant
effect on how fast the system as a whole can respond. What is the dominant
time constant of the system of eq. (P6.49-1)? Substitute this time constant into
the equation determined in part (a). Although the number will not satisfy the equation exacdy, you should .(^ee that it nearly does, which is an mdication that it is very close to the time constant defined in part <a>. Thus, the approach we have outlined in part (b) and here is of value in providing insight into the speed
of response of LTl systems without requiring excessive calculation.
(d) One important use of the concept of dominant time constants is in the reduction
of the order of LTl systems. This is of great prectical signi fierce in problems

Dhap. 6 Problems

501

t
Figure F6.49
involving the anaJysis of complex systems having a few dominant time constants and other very small time constants. In order to reduce the compleuty of the model of the system to be analyzed^ one often can simplify the fasi parts
of the system. That is, suppose we regard a complex system as a parallel interconnection cf ftrst- and second-order systems. Suppo^ also that one of these
sub^ystens, with impulse response ft(t) and step response s{t), is fast-- that is,
that s{i) settles to its final value j(i£) very quickly. Then we can approxirnate this subsystem by the subsystem that settles to the same final value instantaneously.
Thai is, if i(0 is die step re^)onse to our approxxtnation, then
This is iUustraied in H^uie P6.49, Note that the impulse response of the ap-
proximate system is then
whiE^h mfticates that the approximate system is mttnoryiess. Consider again the causal LTI system described by eq. (P6.49-1 ) and, in
particular, the representaticin of it as a parallel interconnection of two first-ordeT systems, as described in part (b). Use the method just outlined to replace the
faster of the two subsystems by a memoryless system. What is the differential equation that then describes the resulting overall system? What is the frequency
reaponseof this system ? Sketch ]i/(j<tf) (not log |//(ytu)|) and <i/(/(u) for both
I
the original and approxinnate systems. Over what range of frequencies are these frequency responses nearly equaJ? Sketch the step responses for both systems. Over what range of time are the step responses nearly equal? Ftoiti your plots, you will see some of the simiiarities arui differences between the originaJ system and its approximation. Hie utility of an approximation such as this depends upon the specific ^>phcation. In particular, one must take into accoutit
both how widely separated the different time constants are and also the namre of the inputs to be considered. As you will see from your answers in Ihis part of
the problem, the frequency response of the approiimate system is essentially the same as the frequency response of the original system at low frequenctes.
That is, wtien the fast parts of the system are sufficiently fast compart to Ihe
rate of fluctuation of the input, the approximation becomes useful.

502

T)me and Frequency ChamcterizatiDn of Signals and Systems

Ohap. 6

6.50. The concepts associated wiih frsqu en cy -selective filtering are often used to separate two signals that have been added together. It the spectra of the two signals do
not overlap, ideal frequency-selective filters are desirable. However, if the spectra overlap, it is often preferable to design the filter to have a gradual transition between
passband and stopband. In this problem, we explore ore approach for determining
the frequency response of a filter to be used for separating signals with overlapping
spectra. Let x(t} denote ii composite continuous-time signal consisting of the sum t)f two signals i(/) + y\it). As indicated in Figure P6,50(a)> we would like to design an LTl filter to recover j(0 from x{0 The fiiter^s frequency response Mijw) is to
be chosen so ihat^ in some sense, y{t) is a "good" approximation to s{t). Let us dcdne a measure of the error between y{t) and j(r) at each frequency
tt> as

where Sijat) and Yijo>y are the Fourier transforms of s{s) and yit), respectively.
(a) Express e(t>) in terms of S{J4o), H{}tii\ and W^(jqi), where Wijw) is the
Fourier transfonn of w{t).
<b> Let us restrict //[/^) to be teal, so th^tfl^C^itj) - H^ijtii) By setting the deriva-
tive of *(w) with respect xaHijio) to be zero, determine the HiJo>) required to
miiiitnize the error *(<*>).
(c) Show that if the spectra of S(jot) and W(jtu) are non -overlapping, the result in
part (b) reduces to an ideal frequency-selective filter. (d) From your result in part (bX determitke and sketch H(jtii) ifSijat) and Wijot)
are as shown in Figure P6 .50(b).

Mt) = 5{t) + w{t}

>- H{iH

fa)

1

2

2

t-

-1

1

Hgurv P6.S0

Chap.  Problems

503

6-51. An ideal bandpass filter is a bandpass filter that j>asses only a range of frequencies, without any change in amplitude or phase. As shown in Figure P6Jl(a), ht the
pa^sband be

^ \Hi !

tuo -^

2

(a) What is the unpuJ&e lesportse fi(i) of this filter?

We (b)

can approximate an ideal bandpass filter by ca^ading a first-order lowpass

and a first-order highpass filter, as shown in Figure P6 .5 1(b). Sketch the Bode

dUgram$ for each of the two filters Hiijof) and Hiijioy

(c) Determine the Bode diagism for the overall bandpass filter in terms of your

results from part (b).

HUuf)

V
"0
-ol-f
fa)

(b)

Figure PA. 5 1'

6,51, In Rgure P6.52(a), we show the magnitude of the frequency response for an ideal
A continuous-time differentiator. nonideal differentiator would have a frequency
response that is some approximation to the frequency response in the figure.
(a) Consider a nonideal diffeientiatar with frequency response Gijia) for which
\Gijoj)\ is constrained to be within Ý10% of the magnitude of die frequency
response of the ideal differentiator at all frequencies; tha:È is,

Sketch the region in a plot of C(jw) vs. to wiiere \Gijfii)\ must be confined to meet this specificarLon.

--

504

Time and Frequencv Charact^riz^ion of Signals ^nd Systems

Chap. 6

H[H[¯H

Slope '1

x(t).

Mu^iplication
by1/T

yft)=|wS)

Ic(eaid¨lay
T sec.

K(t-T)

Figure P6.52
(b) The system in Figure P6.52(b), incorporating an ideal delay of T seconds, is = sometimes used to approximate a continuous-time differentiator. For 7" 10~^
second, determine the frequency ran^ over which the magnitude of the fre-
quency response of the system in the figure is within Ý10% of that for an ideal
differentiator
6^3, In many filtering applications, it is often undesirable for the step respond of a Biter
to overshoot its final value. In processing pictures^ for example^ the overshoot in the
-- step response of a linear filter may produce flare that is, an increa^ in intensity
at sharp boundaries. It is possible, however, to eliminate overshoot by requiring that the impulse response of the Ulter be posidve for all titne.
Show that if h{t), the impube response of a continuous-time LTI filter, is always greater than or equal to 2¨ro, the step response of the filter is a monotonically nondecreasing function and therefore wiU not have overshoot. 6.54. By means of a specific filter design procedme, a nonideal continuous-time lowpass
filter with frequency response Hq(j<**), impulse response h^{t}^ and step response
ioir) has been designed. The cutoff frequency of the filter is at tu = Itt % 10^ rad/&ec, and the step response rise time, defined as the dme required for the step response to go from 10% of its final value to 90% of its final value, is r^ = 10~^ second. From this design, we can obtain a new filter with an arbitrary cutoff frequency ((>( by the use of frequency scaling. The frequency response of the resulting
Biter is then of the form
where a is an appropriate scale factor. (a) Determine the scale factor a sucb that H\pU*^) has a cutoff frequency of Wht.

llip, 6 Problems

505

(b) DctermiTie the impulse response ^ip(/) of the ne\v filu^r in terms y^fwr and fto{0Cd Determine the step response sip{i) of the ne^w filter in terms of oif and J(]tr)
(d) Determine and sketch the rise time of the new filler cLI s. fun<;ti()ti of its cutoff
frequenc> iti^ ,
This is one iUuËitration of ^e tr^dc-off betw^iei^ time-domain and
frequenc> -domain characteristics. In particulaj, as the cutoff frequency decreases, the rise time tends to increase
^*5S, The square of the magnitude of the frequency response of a dass of euntJnucius'tinne lowpass filters, known as Butterwoith filters^ is

1 - (w/wJ^AT
Let us define the passband edge frequency tit^ as the frequency betow which
B{jto)\^ IS greater tiian one-half of its value at tt> = 0; that is,

iBU<of ^ \\B(m\\ \^\<<^j..

Now let us define the stopband edge frequerjcy toj as the fitqiiency above which

= \B(jtij)[^ is less than 10"^ of its value at ii*

0^ that is.

^ \B{ju>f [0-^\B{jO)\\ |cu|>(^,.

The transition band is then the frequency range between *Up and eu,. The faiig ofsff^p

is referred to as the liansition ratio.

For fixed atp^ and niaklng reasonable approximations, determit^e and sketch
N the transition ratio as a functioti of for the class of Butterwortii filters.

6,56, In this problem, we explore some of the filtering issues involved in the commercial

version of a typical system that is used in most modem cassette tape decks to reduce

noise. The primary source of noise ia the high-frequency his^ in the tape playback

^me process, which, in

part, is due to the friction between the tape and the playback

head. Let us assume that the noii;e hiss that is added to the signal upon playback has
the spectrum of Figure F^.56(a) when measured in decibels, with dB eq\ial t<j the
signal level at 100 Hz, The spectrum 5(7w) of the signal has the shape shoiwi in

Figure P6,56(b>,
The system that we analyze has a filter //^{/qj) which ce>nditiDns the signal
j(0 before it is recorded. Upon playback, the hiss n{!) is added to the signal. The

sysEetn is represented schematically in Figure P6J6(c).
Suppose we would like our overall system to have a signal-to-noise ratio of 40
dB over the frequency range 50 Hz < w/2^ < 20 kHz.

(a) E>etermine the transfer characteristic of the filter H\ijat). Sketch the Bode plot

(b) if we were to listen to the signal p(0£ assuming that the playback process does nothing more than add hiss to the signal, how do you think it would sound?
(c) What should the Bode plot and transfer chwacteristic of the filter Hiijiit) be in
order for the signal S{f\ to sound similar to j(/)?

SQb

Time and Frequency Characterization of Signats and Systerns

Chap. 6

-aSdB -4adB

X
5 kHz

10 kHz 2QkHz
(a)

^ f

2-11

20logiflfStj(i.)|

'
/ OdB
-6dBh

L
I
SO

100

1kHz

lOkHE 20 kHz

^]
Hi (H

p(tj
H2(H

(c)
Figure Pfr.56
6*57, Show that if /([n], the impulse response of a discrete-time LTl filter, is always greater
than or equal to zero, the step response of the ftlter \& a m^notonic^tly nondecre^<^ing function and theiefore will not h^ve overshoot,
6^. In the design of eittier analog or digital fi[tcrs> we often approximate a speci^ed
magnitude characteristic without particular regaid to the phase. Fcr exatnple, standard design techniques for lowpass and bandpass filters are lypic^ly derived from a conjiideration of d^e magnitude characteristics only.
In many filtering problems, one would ideally like the pha^ characteristics to
be iero or linear. For causal filters, it is impossible to have zero phase. However^ for
many digital filtering applications, it is ni>j necessary that the unit sample response
< of the filler be zero for n O if the processing is not to be carried out in real time.
One technique commonly used in digital filtering when the data to be filtered are of finite duration and stored> for example, on adise or magnetic tape is to process the dat4 forward and then backward through the same filter.
Let h[n] be the unit sample response of a causal filter with an arbitrary phase
characteristic. Assume that h[n\ is real, and denote ita Fourier transform by H{e^*^ ). Let x{ri\ be the data that we want to fiher ITie filtering operation is performed as
follows:

CUz^r 6 Problems
K[n]

h[n]

*-Q(n]

g|-n^

h[r]

^r[nl

= s[n] r|-n]
(a)

xM

^ h[nl

>-g[n]

x[- n]

"'^ h(nl

(b)
H {bJ^) 1 --

^rH

W 3ii IT
4

507

(c)

Figure P6.58

(a) Method A: Process x[rj] to get s[n\^ as indicated tn Tigure P6J8(a).
1* Determine the overall unit sample response hi[n] that relates x[n] and 5r[n], and show that it has zero phase characteristic.
Z Determine t//i(*>)j and express it in terms of ]^(f>)| and <Hie^'^y
<b) Method B: Process x[ri\ through the fUter h\n\ tw get g[n\ [Figure E*6.5Stt>)l. AIso^ process x\ri\ backward through h{n\ to get i\h\. The output y[n\ is taken to be the sum of g[n\ and fi-n]. The composite s^t of operations can be fepresented by a filter with mpur jc(n], output y[rtj, and unit sample response hj [n]. 1. Show that the composite filter h2\_n\ has t&^to phase characteristic.
2, Determine \H2{e^'^% and express it in terms of \Hie^'^y\ and <H{e^'^).
(c) Suppose that we are given a sequence of finite <luration on which we would like to perform bandpass, zero-phase filtering. Furthermore, assume that we

508

Time and Frequency Characterization of Signals and Sv&lems

Chap, 6

are given the bandpa^g filter h[Ti\ with frequency response as specified in Fig-
ure P6.58(c) and with magnitude characteristic that we desire, but with linear
A phase. To achieve zero phase, we could use either of the preceding methods,
or B. Etetermineand sketch \HiU"^)\ and j//2(fJ")j. From these results, which method would you use to achieve the desired bandpass filtering operation? Explain why. More generally, if h[n] has the desired magnitude, but a nonUnear phase characteristic* which method is preferable to achieve a zero phase char-
acteristic?
6*59, L^xhj[n] denote the unit sample response ofa desired ideal system with frequency
responjie Hd{e^\ and let h[n\ denote the unit sample response for an FIR system
N of length and with frequency response Hie^*^). In this problem, we show that a
rectengular window of length A^ samples applied to /i^ In] will produce a unit sample response ft In] such that the mean square error

is minimized^
<a) The error fimction E{e^'^^ = Hd{e^*^) - //(e^^) can be expressed as the power
serie$

n= -=c
Find the coefficients e\n\ in terms of h^\n\ and h\n\.
(b) Using Parseval*s reladon, express the mean square emjr c^ in terms of the co-
efficients e\n\,
^ (c) Show that for a unit sample lesponse h\p\ of length samples, e ^ is minimized
when

\ Ot

otherwise

That is, simple truncation gives the best mean square approximation to a desired
M irequency response for a fixed value of
6.60. In Problem 6.50, we considered one specific criterion for determining the ftequency
responjse of a continuous-time fUter Ih^ would recover a signal irom the sum of two signals when their spectra overlapped in frequency. For the discrete-time case£ develop die resalt corrcspotfcding to thai obtained in part (b) of Problem 6.50.
6.61. In many situations we have availaible an analog or digital filter module, such as a basic hardware element or computer subroutine. By using the module repetitively or by combining identical module*, it is possible to implenwnt a new fiher widi
improved passband'<T stopband characteristics. In this and the next problem, we
consider two procedtires for doing jus* that. Although the discussion is phrased in
terms of discrete-time filters, much of it applies directly to continuous -time fihers
as well.

Chap. 6 Probieai&

H ie'*"]

I

[

509

fi^
wi w?

TF ¨ Figure P6.61

Consider a lowpass filter with frequency response H{e^") for which |/f(^''")| falls within the tolerance limits shown in Figure 1^.61 ; that is,

^ ^ 1 ~ Bi ^ \me^n\ :^ 1 ^ 5i.

w

(u,,

^ ^ \Hie^'^)\ ^62, t02^ ii>

IT.

A new filter with frequency response Gie^'") is fonned by cascadiitg two identical

filters, both with frequency response Hie^*^}.

(a) Determine the tolerance hmits on |G(^-'">(.

<< (b) Assuming that //{c-^**> is a good approximation to a lowpaas filter, so that 6]

<< 1 and Ï2

1, determine whether the passband ripple for Gie^'^) is larger or

smaller th^ the passband ripple for Hi^eJ"). Also, detemiine whether the stop-

band ripple for Gie^"^} is larger or smaller than the siopbaiKi ripple for H(e^'^).

N (c) If identical filters with frequency response H{e^) are cascaded to obtain a

<< ¨ newfrequencyresponseCC^^*'),thwi, again assuming that 5|

land 62

1, decemiine the approximate tolerance limits on |G(e^^)|.

6^2. In Problem 6,61, we considered otie method for using a basic filter module repetitively to implement a new filter with improved characteristics. Let us now consider

an alternative approach, proposed by J. W. Tufcey in the book. Exploratory Data
An^/yjiJ (Reading, MA: Addison -Wesley Publishing Co., Inc., 1976). The proce-

dure is shown in block diagram form in Figure P6K62(aK

<o> Suppose that H(eJ'^) is real and has a passband ripple of :Ld \ and a stopband

rippla of Ý62 (i^e., Hie''^) falls widntn the tolerance limits indicated in Fig-

ure P6 .62(b)). Tlie frequency response G(ri^**) of the overall system in Figure

P6.62(a) falls within the tolerance limits indicated in Kgure P6,62(c). Etetcr-

D mine A, B, C, and in terms of d| and S^

<< ¨ (b) If Si

land È3

l,whatis the approximatepassbandripple and stopband

ripple associated with G(e^")l Indicate in particular whether the passband rip-

ple for G(e^'") is larger or smaller than the passband ripple for Hie^'^Y Also,

indicate whether the stotrf>and ripple for G(e^'^) is larger or smaller than the

stopband ripple for HieJ*^).

(c) In parts {a} and (b), we assumed that ^(e^^) is real. Now consider H{e^") to
have the more general form

where Wi (^^'^) !È mal and 0{ii>) is an unspecified phase characteristic. If |//(f-'">[

510

Time and Frequeixiy Character izatigr at Signals and Systems

Cl^ap. 6

9("1

win]

(a)

È Uh ^

S Imlig^

4il :^ IT

<B^n
.^..^-^'U^;|i^a^
B '' r\-y,^.'A^

(bl

A s 6 (e'") s B C :^ G (e^*) :^ D

D s ¨ ^ u>p
atg^uy:^-n

_1

'

Wp

>Tr

Fjgune P&.62

is a reasonable approximatioii to an ideal lowpass filter* wiil |G(¨^" ){ necessarily

be a reasonable ^vpro^cimatiQii to an ideal lowpa^ filter'^

Now (d)

assume that M{e^'^) is an FIR linear-phase lowpass filter, so that

Chap. & Problems

511

M where H\{e^*'^) is real and is an integer. Show how to modify the system in
Figure P6.62(a) so that the overall system will approximate a lowpass Jilier.
6.63. Ill the desigr of digital filcers, we often ehcw^ a filter with a specified magnitude
characteristic that has the shortest duratioti. That is, the impulse response^ which is the inverse Fourier transform of the complex ftcqucncy spectr\im, should be as
narrow as possible. Assuming that h[n\ is real, we wish to show that if the phase
0{w) associated with the frequency response H{e^"*) ]2> zero, the duraiion uf the impulse response is mitiimaL Let the frequency response be expressed as

and let us consider the quantity
3
to be a measure of the dur^don of the associated impulse response h[n\, (a) Using the derivative property of the Fourier transform and Patsevars relation,
D express; in terms offiie^'^).
(b) By expressing Hie^*^) in terms of its magnitude |i/(W")| and phase 9{ti)\ use
D your result from part (a) to show that is minimized when Bim ) = 0.
6,54, For a discrete-time filter to be causal and to have exactly linear phase, its impure response must be of finite length and consequently the difference equation must be nonrecursive. To focus on the insight behind this statement, we consider a partkulai case, that of a linear phase characteristic for which the slope of the phase is an integer TTius, the frequency response is assumed to be of the foim

where H^ie^^) is real and even.

Let h{n\ denote the impulse response of the filter widi frequency response

H{e^'^) and let hr\.r\\ denote the impulse response of the filter with frequency re-

sponse Hrie^'^y.

(a) By using the appropriate properties in Table 5.1, show that:

L = hr[n] ^ /ij,{-n] (i.e., Arlnl is symmetric about fl

0),

2. h\n\ = K[n - Ml

(b) Using your result in part (a), show that with Hie^"^) of the form shown in eq. (P6.64-1), h[n\ is synmietnc about n = M, that is,

h[M + rt] = h{M - n].

(P6.64^2>

(c) According to the result in part (b), the linear phase characteriihtic in eq,
(P6.64-I) imposes a symmetry in the impulse response. Show that if k{n]
is causal and has the symmetry in eq. <P6.64-2)> then

h[Ti\ - 0,

n < and rt > 2Af

(i.e., It must be of finite length).

BX2

Time and Frequency CharactefiziUon o1 Sifinal^ and Systems

Chap, t

6.65. FoTac^^ii^ otdiscrete-tiinelDwpass filters, known as Buttcrworth filters, the squared
niagt^itude of the frequency response b given by

- |B(*-'")P

-

1

where w^ is the cutoff frequency (whicli ue shall take to be n/2) and A^ is the order

= of The filter (which we shall consider to be Af

1). Thus, we have

-

1

l^<^-'">r

1 + tax^{u>fiy

-- i&) U^ing irigonometricidentities, show that [B(e^**')j^

cds^(w/2).

(h) Lei S<eJ^) = acos(w/2). For what complex values of a is |5(fJ'*')p the same

as in part (a)?

(c) Show that B(e^^ ) from part (b) is the transfer function corresponding to a dif-

ference equation of the form

= y[rt] ctx[n] + ^x[n - y].

Determine cr, ^, and y.

6,66.

In Figure P6,66(a) we show a disorete-time system consisting of a parallel combi-

N = - nation of LTI filters with impulse response h^ [/t], A:

0> 1 ,

, jV

1. For any Jt,

hi^[n] is related to h^[n] by the ejtpression

(a> If AofnJ is an ideal discrete-time lowpass filter with frequency response Hii(e^'^)
as shown in Figure P6,66(b)^ sketch the Fourier transforms of h\ [n\ and /ijv- \[rt]
< for 11^ in the range -nr w :È +7r.

--^ k-O
FiguK PA.&6a

Cha|}. S Problems

Ho(en

513

Figurv P6.66b
(b> E>etennme the vaJue of the cutoff ircquency c^f in Figure P6.66(b) in terms of
N < ^ (0 oie tt) such th^ the system of Figunt P6l 66(a) is an identity system;
= that IS, y[n] x[n\ for all n and any input x[n].
(c) Suppose that h[n] is no longer restricted to be an ideal lowpas^ filler. If /[[n] denotes the impu)^ response of the entire syscetn in Hgure P6^66(a) with input x\n] and output y[n], then k[n] can be expressed in the form
Deteimine and sketch r\ti\. <4) From your result of part (c)j determine a necessary and sufficient condition on
/io[ril to ensLure that ths overall system witl be an identity system (i.e., sucb that for Any input x[n]^ the output y[n] will be identical lo x[rt]). Your answer should not contain any sums.

7

Sampling

HJ3J~

r^-^

IJidll.

7,0 rNTROOUCTJON

514

Under certain condidGns, a continuous-time signa] can be completely represented by and

recoverable from knowledge of its values, or samples, at points equally spaced in time.

This somewhat surprising propeity foll&ws from a basic result that is refeTTcd to as the

sampling theorem. This theorem is extremely important and useful. It is exploited, for

example, in moving pictures, which consist of a sequence of individual fi-ames, each of which represents an instafltaneous view (i.e., a sample in time) of acontinuously changing
scene. When these samples are viewed in sequence at a sufficiently fast rate, we perceive

an accurate i^presentationof the original continucusJy moving scene. As another e?;ainple

printed pictures typically consist of a veiy fine grid of points, each ccrresponding to a

sample of the spatially continuous scene representBd in the pictuierif the samples are

sufficiently close together, the picture appears to be spatiaJly continuous, although under

a mollifying glass its representation in terms of samples becotnes evident.

Much of the importance of the sampling theorem also Ues in its role as a bridge

between continuous-time
me fact that under certain

signals and
conditions a

discrete-time signals. As we will see in this chapter,
continuous-time signal can be completely recovered

ftorti a sequtaicc of its samples provides a mechanism for representing a continuous-time

signal by a discrete-time signal. In many comejcts^processrag discrete-time signals is more

flexible and is often preferable to processing contitiuous-time sighals. This is due in laige

m part to the dramatic development of digital lechnoJogy over ibe past few decades, result-
ing the availability of inexpensive, lightweight, prograimnable, and easily reproducible

discrete-time systems. The concept of sampling, then, suggests atl CKtremely attractive

and widely employed method for using discrete-time systeiti technology to implement

continuous-time systems and process continuous-time signals: 1^ exploit sampling to

S

Sec 71

Representatiori of a Continuous-Time Signal by Its Samples: The Sampling Theorem 5 1

convert a continuous-time signal to a discrete-time signal, process the discrete -time signal using a discrete-ume system^ and then convert bact to continuous time.
In the following discussion, we introduce and develop the concept of sampling and
die process of reconstructii^ a continuous-time signal from its samples. In this discus-
sioft, wp both identify the conditions under which a coTitinuous-dme ^ignsil can \x exactly
reconstructed from its samples and examine the consequences when these conditions are not ,satisfied. Following this, we explore the processing of condituous-time signals that have been converted to disctete-time signals through sampling. Finally, we examme the
sampling of discrete-time signals and the related concepts of decimation and interpola-
tion.

7, 1 REFRESENTATTON OF A CONTJNUOUS-TlME SIGNAL BY ITS SAMPLES:
THE SAMPLrNG THEOREM
In general, in the absence of any additional conditions or infomiadon. we would not expect
that a signal could be uniquely specified by a sequence of equally spaced samples. For
example, in Figure 7.1 we illustrate tJnee different continuous-time signals, alt of which
have identical values at integer multiples of T; that is.

Clearly, an infitiite number of sigtials can generate a given set of samples. As we
-- will see, however, if ^ signal is band limited i,e., if its Fourier transform is zero outside
-- a finite band of frequencies nnd if the samples are taken sufficiently close together in
relation to the highest frequency present in the signal, then th& samples uniqueiy specify
the signal, and ve can reconstruct it perfectly This result^ known as the sampling theorem.
is of profound importance in the practical application of the methods of signal and system
anatysis-

Flgure 7.1 Three comtlnuous-time signals with iderittcal values at integer
fTJUft^pfes of 7".

.

516

Sa/npllng

Chap, 7

7. T.I Impulse-D^ain Sampling
In order to develop the sampling theorem, we tiftcd a conveoiem way in which to represent the sampling of a continuou^-tinie signal at regular intervals. A useful way to do this is
through the use of a periodic impulse train multipUed by the coatinuoas-dme signal x[t) that we wish to san^jle This mechanism, known as impulse-Train sampling, is depicted in Figure 7.2. The periodic impulse traiti p(_t} is referred to as the sampling funaion. the
period T as the sampling period! and the fundamental frequency of p{t). co^ = lir/T, is
ihe sampiingfreqit^ncy^ In the time domain*

XpU) - xiDpitl

(7,1)

where

X KO -

^(^"'^n^

(7.2)

Because of the sampling property of the unit icnpulse discussed in Section t ,4.2, we
know that multiplying M.t) by a unit impulse samples the value of the signal at the point at which the impulse is located; i,e., xit)B{t - 1^) - ~ jcik)^(^ 'o)- Applying this to cq. (7. 1), we s^e, as illustr^Ued in Figure 7.2, that Xp(t) is an impulse train with the amplitudes of

m

*->tp(t)

[*-T-*]

pffl

Figure 7.2 Impulsfi-Uam .^ampiing

Sec. 7.1

Representation of a Continuous-Time Signal by lt& Samples. T1>e Sampling Theorem St 7

the iiupukes equal to the samples of t(0 at mtervals spaced by T"; that is^

a3)

Froin the multiplication property f Section 4.5), we know that XpU*^) = ^[XiJ<o)*PiM)],

PA)

and from E^ampJe 4,8,

^(£ X 2-- +=^

= "^

^<*^ - ^'>'

(7,5)

= Since convolution with an impulse simply shifts a signal [i.e., X(jui) * S{o> -- &>o)
~ X(j{at A'o))]. it follows that

1 J"TM
A=-^

(7.6)

Tliatis^ Xp(jiit) is a periodic function of iw consisting of a superposition of shifted replicas

< ofX{jo>X scaled by IfT, as illustrated in Figure 7.i. In Figure 7.3(c), ti>M (w^ - tj>M),

> or equivalently, <Os 2wm, and thus there i^ no overlap between the shifted replicas of

< X(jti}), whet¨asin Figuie 7.3(d), with a£j 2aif^^ there is overlap. For fhecase illustrated

F^re in

7.3(c), Xijtit) is faithfully reproduced at integer multiples of the sampling A'e-

> quency. Consequently, if oij Toi^Mt xO} can be recovered exactly from Xp{r) by means of

Ktitt)
A U>

P(K0)

LJ T

-2wt

!*>¨

(b)

LJ

££>¨

2".

Figure 7.3 Effect in the frequency

domain of sampling in the time do-

3u>a

li>

miifl: (a) spectrum uf t)ri(^inal signal;

(b) spectrum of sampling} functions

51B

Sampfing

:hap.

(eft (W^ - tM^O

Frgure 7.3 CoflUnued ic) spe:trunn
> of sampled signal wrth ot^ 2^^^:
(d) spectrum of sampled signal witti

abwpass filterwithgainrandaciitoff frequency greater than w^i^ and less thanft^j -<i>_m,
as mdioated in Figure 7,4. This l>asic result, referred to as the sampling theorem, can be
stated as follows: '

Sampling Theorem:

= > Let x{t} be a band-limited signal with X{j(t>)

for |(w| ^j^a^. Then x{t) is uniquely

determined by it^ samples :x:{nTX n - 0, Ý 1 , Ý2

if

> ate 2<o My

where

2tt
tWv ^

Given these samples, we can reconstruct x(t) by genetHting a peri<Kiic impulse train in
which successive impulses have amplitudes that are siicce^sive sample values. This
T impulse train is then processed through an ideal lowpass filter with gain and cutjIT
frequency greater than o^m and less than Wj - 0)^^ The resultir^g output signal will
exactly equal Jt(f).

' Tbc impuiuat and cLegaot sampling tlieorem was available for many years, in. a \anety of furnw in

the niiatbenL3iJc¨ literatuit See, foe example, J. M. Whittaker, "iDLcrpoIatary Function Theory/' (New Yorti

Stecher-Hufaer Service Ageney, 1964), chap, 4- It did not apipear ejtplicttly in Lht literature 4jf comiiiuii]4:atif>Ti

theory uiuj I tlie publitatioa in I^9cftbr classic papcrby Shaanon ? otitic ' CommLtnication in the Presence of

Noise" {Proceedings ofthe iRE, January 1 949, pp. 10-21>. However. H. Ny^uJst in 192S and D. Gabor in l^4fi

2TW had pointed out, based on the use of the Fourier SerieSn that

Dumbers are sufficieal to represent a function

of duration randhighef^ frequeiKy W. IH. Nyguisi/'Certain Topics inTfelcgraphTtamsnciissionTheory/M/f^

TrtmsacUtms, 1926, p. ^17; D. Gabisr, *Thcufy of Ccnpnninication,"ioiinuiJ of SEE 93. no. 26 \\^ti), p. 42i^.i

1

Sec. 71

Representation of a Continuous-Time Signal by its Samples: The Safnpling Theorem 5i9

x(t).

XpO(i>}

hH X > L

^ H[JQl)

fa)

*-x,(l)

1

1

<^i>2wtJ^

f^

H(M
^m'^Wc'^K-i^m)

(d)

vi\u,]
1

¨M

f^M

b>

^^'

Figure 7.4 Exact recovery of a contlnucu5'tim8 signal from its sampies using an ideal lowpass niter: (a) system for sampling and recon^
struction; (b) representative spectrum tor x{i)\ (c) coiTespondir>Q spectrum for i(fi{t), (d) ideal lowpa$3 filter to recover X{jL) from Jf^tMi i^) spectrum
Of X,{t).

The frequency 2utM, wtiich* under the sampling theorem, must he e^^ceeded by the sampling frequency, is oommonly referred to as flw ?/yquist rate?
As discussed in Chapter 6, ideaJ filters are generaJly not used in practice for a va-
riety of reasons. In any practical application, the ideal lowpass filter in Figure 7.4 would be

^The A¨queiicy cj¨ carre^)onduii| to one-half i^e Nyquist tatt is uften rc^ferred to a^ tht /<fyquts\fiv-

520

Samp|in&

Chap. 7

replaced by a nonideal filter /f (>aj) that appiojti mated the desired frequency t:haracter-
Utic accurately enough = for ihe problem of interest (i.e., ^(jcu) 1 < for \w\ ojy, and
m H{jcj) =^ for |Èd| > <t>s- ww) Obviously, any such approximation the lowpass filter-
ing sta^e will lead to some di.st;repancy between x(t) and xAt) in Figure 7.4 or, equivalently, between X{Jat) and XAjiij)^ The particular choice of nonideal filter is then dictated hy the acceptable level of distortion for the application under consideration For t:onve-
nience and to emphasize basic principles such as the sampling theorem, we will regularly me ass u the avai 1 abil ity and u se of ideal fl 1 lers throughout this and the next c hapter, with the
understandmg that in practice such a filter must be replaced by a nonidcal filter designed
to approximate the ideal characteristics accurately enough for the problem at hand,

7.1.2 Sampling with a Zenc^-Order Hold

The sampling theorem, which is most easily explained in terms of impul^e-lram sampling.

estabJishey the fact that a band-limited signal is uniquely represented by its samplcii. In

practice, however, narrow, large- amplitude pulses, which approximate impulses, are also

relatively difficult to generate ^nd transmit, and it is often mare convenient lo gener;ite the sampled signal in a form referred lo as a Zjero-order hold. Such a system samples xit) ac

a given instant and holds that value until the next instant at which a sample is taken, as illustrated in figure 7.5. The reconstruction of xif) from tbe output of a zero-order hold

can again be carried out by lowpasjj filtering. However, in this case, the required filter

no longer has constant gain in Che passband. To develop the required filter characteristic, we first note that the output j^>(r) of the zero-order hold can in principle be generated bv

impulse-train sampling followed by an LTI system wich a rectangular impulse response, as

depicted in Figure 7.6. To reconstruct x{t) from jcj(i')^ we consider processmg xt:^W) with an LTI system with impulse response ft,(f) and frequency response HAjoit) The cascade of

this system with the system of Figure 7.6 is shown in Figure 7,7, where we wish to specify

Hf{joi) so that rit) = x(t). Comparing the system in Figure 7,7 with that in Figuie 7 4.

= we see that r(f)

x(t) if the cascade combination of hf^it) a/id hfij} is ihc idea] lowpasi,

filter H{jti>) used in Figure 7.4. Since, from Example 4.4 and the time-shifting property

in Section 4.3.2,

//o(jw) = (>-J"^^^ 2 sin{(tf r/2)
oi

(7.7)

this requmss that

J^rO) - .JofTfZ H{ji^)
2 sin(&jr/2)
iii

(7.S)

AX)

Zero-order j^oit)

Figure 7.5 Sampling utilizing a zero-ord¨r hold.

Sec. 7.1

Represemation of a Conltnuous-Tlme Signal by Its Samples, The Samping Theorem 521

-- K(r)

> f^

*-Kfl(tl

KttJ

JtpW
llli
>=o(t)
^TUf--^

Figure 7.6 Zero-order hold as
inipul$e4rain simpling followed by an LTI system with a rectangular impulse
re$pansfr-

H(jw)

*- r(t)

Rgure 7.7 CasMC^ ot th¨ repTESfintMtoti oi a zeroH>rder ho^tJ tBgure 7.6)
wth a reconsb'uction fitter.

522

Sampling

Chap. T

Figure 7.B Magnitude and pha$¨
for ttie fftconsvructiof^ filttr for a zeroorder hold.
^ For exjimple, with cutoff fiequency otHtjw) equal to <j+/2, ihe ideal magnitude and
phase for the reconstruction filter followiag a zero-order hold is that shown in Figure 7.8. Once agai n^ in practice the frequency response i n cq . (7. S) cannot be ex actly real ized^
and thus an adequate approximation to it must be designed, hi fact, in many situations, the
c^utpniof the zero -order hold is con^sidered an adequate approxitn^on to the original signtU by Itself, without any additional lowpass filtering, and in essence represents a possible, although admittedly very coarse^ interpoiation between die saniple valuer. Alternatively, in
some application^^ we may wish to perform some smoother interpolation between sample values, [n the next section, we explore in more detail the general coocept of interpreting
the reconstruction of a signal from its samples as a process of interpolalion.
7.2 RECONSTRUCTION OF ASiGNAL FROM ITS SAMPLES
USING I^^TFRPOLATION
Interpolation, that is, the fitting of ^ continuous signal to a set of sample values, is a commonly used procedure for reccujitructing a function, either approximatet^ or exactly,
from samples. One simple interpolation procedure is the zero^rder hold discussed in
Section 7.1. Another useful form of interpolation is linear interpolation, whereby adjacent sample points are connected by a sLriiight line, as illustrated in Figure 7.9. In more
Figure 7*9 Lmeif interpolation between sarrpi¨ points. The dashed cun/e
represents the orifliial slg^<^^ aTio the ^ sofid curve the linear inrerpQlation.

Sec. 7.2

Reconstruction ofa Signal from Its Sampler Using Interpolation

523

complicated interpatatitm formulas, sample points may be connected by higher order poly-
nomials or other mathematical functions.
As we have seen in Section 7,1, for a band-limited signal^ if the sampling instants
are suffaciendy close, then the &\giia} can be reconstructed exactly; i.e., through the use
of a lowpass filter, e?[act inteipolation can be catried out bet\yeen the sample points. The
interpretation of the reconstruction of x{t) as a process of interpolation becoine^ evident
when ^e consider the effect in the tin^ domain of the lowpa$s filicir in Figure 7.4. Jn
particular^ the output is
Mi) - JCf,{t}*h{i)

or, with Xp{t) given by eq. (7.3),

2 = -^.(0

MnT)Hr-aTl

(7.9)

Equation (7.9) describes how to fit a continuous curve between the sample points x{nT) and consequently represents an interpolation formula. For the ideal lowpass ftlter
H(Jat) in Figure 7.4,

-- hit) ^ w^rsm(--w^r^O,

(7.10)

SO that

= The reconstruction according to eq, (7,11) with w^ Wj/2 is illustrated in Figure 7.10,
Figure 7.10(a) represents the original band-limited signal jc(r)£ and Figure 7.10(b) represents Xp\X\ the impulse train of samples. In Figure 7.\0(c>, the superposition of ihc individual terms in eq. (7.|1) is iiliLstrated.
Interpolation using the impulse response of an ideal lowpass filter as in eq, (7.11)
is commonly referred to as band-timlred interpolation, since it implements exac^ reconstruction if x(t) is band limited and the sair^pling frequency satisfies the conditions of the sampling theorem. As wt have indicated, in many cases it is preferable
to use a less accurate, but simpler, filter or£ equivalently> a siinpler interpolating function than the function in eq, (7.10), For example^ the zero-order hold can be viewed as a fonn of interpolation between sample values in which the interpolating function A(r) is the impulse response hriO depicted in Figure 7.6. In that sense, with A(>(r) in the figure corresponding to the appro ximatioij to x{t), the system htiit) represents an approximation to the ideal lowpass filter required for the exact interpolation. Figure 7.11 shows the magnitude cjf the transfer function of the zenj-order-bold interpolating filter, superimposed on the desired transfer function of the exact interpolating
filtei,
Bodi from Figure 7.11 ai>d from Figure 7.6, we see that the zero-order hold is a very rough approximation^ although in som^ cases it is iufficientH For example, if additional

524^

S^nnplino

Chap 7

,'
I 1
i t J
1

l"''^^
,
>

,' - .

^

^

1
\

{W

v*^

Figure 7,10 Ideal band-iimitEd in-

terpolatjcn u&ing the sine function:

(a) band-limited signal x(/}; (bj im-

pulse tram of samples of x{\Y (c) ideal band-hmlted interpolation In wnich the

impulse train is replaced by a superpo-

(c)

sition of sine functions (eq f7.1l)J

2efo-ord9r hold

Ideal interpolatirkg
filter
Figure 7.11 Transfer function for
^e zerQ-order tiold and for iTie ideal
interpolating filter.
lowpass filtering is naturally applied in a given applicadc^n, it will tend to improve the overall inteq>olation. This is illustrated in the case of pictures in figure 7.12. Figure 7.12(a) shows pictures with impulse sampling (i.e., sampling with spatially narrow pulses) Figure 7.12(b) i* the residt of applying a two-ditnensional zero-order
hold to Figure 7, 12(a), with a resulting mosaic effect. H<>wever, the human visual system inherently imposes lowpass tillering, and consequently, when viewed at a dis-
tance, the discontinuities in the mosaic are smoothed. For example, in Figure 7.12(c) a

Fr^iifv 7-12 (3) 7t)e original pictures of Figures 6.2(a} and (g) v/ith impulse sam^ J3linp; (b) zero^rder hold applied to t^te pictures in (a). The visual system naturaJly
JDftroduces lowpass filtering with a cutoff frequency that Etecreases with distance, ITiLs, when viewed al a dkstance, the dtecontlnulties In the mosajc In Figure 7 12(b) are smootbed; (c) result of applying a zero-order hold after impulse sanr^plng wilb one-third the horizontal and vertical spacing used in (a) and {b).

52S

526

SamplinQ

Chap. 7

zero-order hold is again u&ed, but here the sample spacing in each direction ii one-fourth that in Figure 7J2u)- With normal viewing, coniiderabte lowpass filtering is nauimllj applied, al^ough the mosaic effect is sdll evident.
If the crude inteipoiation provided by the zero-order hold is insuflicient, we can use
a variety of smoother interpolabon strategies, some of which are known collectively as higher order holds. In particul^, the zero-order hold produces an c)utput signal, as in Fig-
ure 7.5i that is disc;£ntinuou5. In contrast^ linear inteipolatioii, as illustrated in Figure 1.9. yields reconstructions that are continuous, although with discontinous derivatives due to the <;hanges in slope at the sample points. Linear interpalatiotiT which is sometimes referred
to as a first-order hold, can also be viewed as interpolation in the form of Ingure 7.4 and eq. (7.9) with /t(0 triangular, as illustrated in Figure 7. 1 3. The a^ssociated transfer funetion is also shown in tbe figure and is

i2
//{£ = 1 &m{b>T/2)
w/2

(7.12)

The transfer function of the first-order hold is shown superimposed on the transfer fimction for the ideal interpolating filter. Figure 7.14 corresponds to ihe same pictures as those in Figuins 7.1 2(b), but with a iirst-order hold applied to the sampled pictuire. In an anaJo'gous
fashion, we can deiine seoond- and higher order holds that produce reconstructions with a
higher degree of sraoothaess. For example, the output of a second-order hold provides an inteqxilation of the sample values that is continuous and has a continuous first derivative and discontinuous second derivative.

m

- -- X 1 =

* h{t)

(a^

^JX)

Q

1
T 2T
fb)
h(t)

2K

^ (=)

^

*- >t,|t)
Figure 7, 1 3 Linear intarpolatton {nrst-or<ier hold} as impulse-train sampimg fallowed by convolution with a
tnangular impulse response: (i) sys-
tem for sampling and ret^nstruction;
(b) impulse train o1 samples; (c) impulse response representing a flrstorder tiokj;

Sec. 7.3

Tha Effect of UndersampUng: Aliasing

527

Figure 7. 1 3 CoittinuBd (rf) tirst-
prder ^old applied to the sampled sigrtal; (e) comparison at transfer func^on of Ideal interpolating filter and firstorder hold.
7.3 TME EFFECT OF UNDERSAMPUNG: ALIASING
In previous sections in this chapter, it was assumed that the sampling frequency wai sufficiently high that the conditions of the samphng theoiem were met. As illustrated in
Figure 7 3, with tv^ > 2i>Mt the spectrum of the sampled signal consists of scaled replications of the spectrum of x(f), and this fomis the basis for the sampling theorem. When

{a^

(tJ)

Figure 7.14 Rwult of applying a firet-ordBr hold rather than A zero-order hold af-
ter Impulse sampling with one-third the horizontal and vertical spacing used in Figures 7.12(a) and (b)

;

52e

Sampling

Chap. 7

< ai., 2ii>\f, X(jai), the spectrum of jf(f), is no longer replicated in X^(ja£) and thus is

no longer recoverable by lowpass filtering. This effect, in which ttte individual teims in

eq. (7.6) overlap, is referred^to as aliasing, and in this section we explore its effeci: and

consequences.

A < Clearly, if the system, of Figure 7 is applied to a signal with w^ 2<om, the

xM reconstructed signal

will no longer be equal to x(t)- However, as explored in

Problem 7.25, the original signal and the signal Xr(t) that i^ j^con^tructed using band-

Irmjted interpdation will slways be equal ar the sampluig instants; that Vi, for any i^jce

jf,{¨r> - xinTX n = 0.Ý\,Ý2

(7.U)

Some insight into the relationship between xit) and xXt) when oi^ < 1^^ is pro-
vided by considering in more detail the con:^>aratively simple case of a sinusoidal signal.
Thus, let

j(f) = coswor,

(7.14)

with Fourier U-ansfomi X{jta) as indicated in Fignre 7.15(a). In this figure, we have graphically distinguished the impulse at a*o from that at ^wo f"^ convenience. Let us
ctidsidcr Xp{jitf\ the spectrum of the sampled signal, and focus in particular on the
effect of a change in the frequency a*o with the sampling frequency <a^ fixed. In Fig-
ures 7.15(b)--(e), we illustrate Xp(Jta) for several values of toQ. Also indicated by a dashed hne is the passhand of the Ifiwpass filter oif Rgnne 7.4 with &^ = Wj/2, Note that no aliasing occurs in (b) and (c), since ¨¨ < ti)^/2, whereas aliasing does occur
in (d) and (e). For each of the four cases, the lowpass filtered output Xr(t) is given as
follows:

(b) fljo = -T-;

= = Jff(0

cosÈtf<jf

Mt)

(d) MO = -^

- ^ Xrit) = CO^w^ <t^ti)t

Jt(f>.

Wh^iaJiasiJtgoccurs, the original freqtiency Wo takes on the identity of a lower fre-

< < quency, ftjj--Q>o. For a)j/2 wo Ws, as Djj increases relative to Wj, the output frequency

When -- (Its cdfl decreases.

co^

=

wo* for example, the reconstructed signal is a constant.

This is consistent with the fact that, when sampling once per cycle, the samples are all

equal and would be identical ic those obtained by sampling a constant signal (wo = 0).

In Figure 7 J 6, we have depicted, for each of the four cases in Figure 7. 1 5, the signal x{0.

its sajTiples, and the reconstructed signal xAO- From the figure, we can see how the lowpass

Sec. 7.3

The Effect of Undersampling: ABasing

Xii^)

r
1

f

-Wp <**o

¨

(a)

Li w*

Xp(jai)

¨t = :^

ft t

:

U>Q Mj

<^

529

Wo = 2^

1^^ t

tJt

s

Aliasing
11 ^(U,

Aliasing

t.t

Xf^ita)
1

XpUo)

i

t

.4<ii,

11

"a

Cc>

u
COtjli),
2

5(u.
.
t
u

Figure 7,1 5 Effect in ttie frequeiicy

dorn^n of aversampjirtg and under-

sampling: (a) spflctrim of arigin^l si-

nusoidal signal; (b), [z] spectrum of

> sampled signal with oi^

2ajt): (df^,

(e) spectrum <iif sampled signal wrtti
< atf 2ct4. As wa increase c^ in mov-

ing frOfTi (b) through (d), the impulses
drawn with solid lines mov^ to ttie

nght£ while the impulses drawn with

dashed iirtes move to the Fert. rn (d)

and (e), these impulses have movfld

sufflciently that there is a change m the

ones faning within th? passband of the

ideal lowpass ftlter.

filter mterpolates l>etwen the samples, in particular always fitting a sinusoid of frequency less than t>j/2 to the samples of jr(f).
As a variation on the preceding examples^ consider the signal

= + X(t)

COS(ttJof c^).

r^l5)

'
3l<

^-.

ra

I

9&(£

* t

5£

a

E

1

^1

n

^

XV)

^

V

5B0

C3 . .

-- C ^6=

"

Q _ _ OS -' *0 .= to

3 CM

'? LA

S -- ^ D (V 15
^ [-1

_ C (A O^u ^

=£-=

It

CD !-

^^

**l
^1"
-*"-H

1

K-*-

i

/
^

3

ti.

\

1
i
J-

t /

^

I

53

532

Sampling

Cliap. 7

In this C(L^, the Fourier tiansform of x(t) is essentially the same as Figure 7.15(aX except that the impulse indicated with a solid line now has amplitude tre^^^ while the

irnpulse indicated with a dashed line has annphtude ivith the opposite phase, namely,
tte'^'^. If we now consider the same set of choices for tUQ as in Figure 7 J 5^ the re-

sulting spectra for the sampled versions of cosfcuuf -I- 0) are exactly as in the figure,

with all solid impulses having amplitude jt^^* and al\ dashed ones having amplitude

TTf "J*. Again, in cases (b) and (c) the condition of the sampling theorem is met, so

= dial Xf{t}

+ cos(Wflf (^) ^ x{t\ while in <d> and (e) w^ again have aliasing. How-

ever, we now see that there has been a reversal in the solid and d^hed impulses ap-

pearing in the passband cf the lowpass filler As a resuit, we find that in these cases, xU) = cos[(w.,--ajo)f~<^L where we have a change in the sign of the phasedJ. e, ^ phase

reversal.

It is important to note that the sampling theorem explicity requires that the sampling frequency be greater than twice the highest frequency in the signal, rather dsan greater
than or equal to twice the highest frequency. The next exarnple illustrates that sampling a
sinusoidal signal at exacdy twice its frequency (i.e., exactly two samples per cycle) is not

sufhcicni.

Example 7.t
Consider the sinusoidal signal
xU) = coslyf + ^|,

and suppose that ihh signal is sampled, using impulse sampling, a1 exactly twice die
frequency of the sinusoid, i,e,, at sampling trequency to,. A* shown in Problem 7.39, if
this impulse-sampled signal Ik applied as the input to an ideal lowpaas Alter with cutoff frequency w,/2, the lesutting output is
mN^ XriO = (cos ^) cos
As a con.^equcnce. we see that perfect reconstruction of jf(r> occurs only in the cise in
which the ptiase 4> is Kro (or an integer multiple of 2tt}. Otherwise, the signal j(At} does
not equal xU).
As an exneme example, consider the case in which 4r = -Trf2, so that
j;(;) = sinf^:l.

We This signal is sketched in Figure 7. 1 7

observe that the valuoii of the signal at integer

multiples of the sampling peiiod 2ir/Wj are zero. Conflftjuenlt^, sampling at this rate

produces a signal that is identically zero^ and when this zero ir^^ut is applied to the ideal

iowpass filter, the resulting output Xf{t) is also identically zero.

Sec. 7.3

The Effect of Undersamplin^: Aliasing

533

Figure 7.17 Sinusoidal signal for Example 7.1.

The effect of undersampting, whereby higher frequencies ^re reflected mto Ic^wer

frequencies, is the principle on which the stroboscopic effect is based. Consider, for exam-

ple, the situation depicted in Figure 7.1 8, in which we have a disc rotating at a constant rate
^ wich a single radial line marked on the disc. The flashing strobe acts !t j^ampljng system,

When since it illunriinates the disc for extremely brief time Intervals at a periodic rate.

the

strobe fiiequ&ncy is much higher than the rotational speed of the disc, the speed of rotation

of the disc is perceived correctly. When the strobe freq|uency becomes less than twice the

rotational frequency of the disc, the rotation appears to be at alower ti^uency than is actu-

ally the case. Furthermore, because of phase reversal , the disc will appear to be rotating in

the wrong direction^ Roughly speakiiig, if we track the position of a fixed line on the disc
< at successive samples* then wbai lOo ct^ ^ < 2ati), so that we sample somewhat more fre-

quently than ottce per revolution, samples of the disc will show the fixed line in positions

that are successively displaced in a counterclockwise direction, opposite to the cloctwise

= rotationof the disc itself. At otfce flash per revolution, correaponding to toj(

&j[>, the radial

line appears stationary (iÈ,, the iDtational frequertcy of the disc and its harmonica have
A been aliased to zero frequency). similar effect is commonly observed in Western movies.

Rotating dtec

Strotie

Figure 7. 18 Strobe effect.

534

Sampling

Chap. 7

where the wheels of u. stagecoach appear to be rotating more shiwlj than would be consisifirtt with the CL>ach s forward motion, and sometimes Id the wrong direcuon. In this case, the sampling pTiot:ess corresponds to the fact that moving pictures are a sequence of individual frames with a rate (usually between 18 and 24 frames per ^lecond) corresponding
to the sampling frequency.
The preceding discussion suggests inccrpreting the strrboscopic effect as an exampleof a useful application of aliasing due to undcrsampling. Another practical application of aliasing arises in a measuring instnunent referred to as a sampling o^ciUoscope, This instniment is intended for obser\ing very high-frequency waveforms and exploits the prin ciples of sampling to alias these frequencies into ones that arc more easily displayed The sampling oscilloscope is explored in more detail in Problem 7.38.

7.4 DJSCRETE-T1ME PROCESSING OF CONTTNUOUS-TJME SIGNALS

Tn many applications, there is a significant advantage offered in processing a continuous-
time signal by first converting it to a discrete-time signal and, after discrete-lime process-
ing, converting back to a continuous-time signal. The discrete-time signal processing can be implemented with a general- or special-purpose computer, with microprocessors, or
with any of the variety of devices that are specifically oriented toward discrete-time signal
processing.
in broad terms, this approach lo continuous-time signal processing can be viewed as the cascade of three operations, as indicated in Figure 7. 19, where x^{t) artd y, it'} are continuous-time signals and x^[n\ andyj[nj are the discrete -time signals corresponding to
Xc{t) and >'t (/). The overall system is, of course, a continuous-time system in the sense that its input and output are bodi continuous- time signals. The theoretical ba^sis for converting
a continuous-time signal lo a discrete- time signal and reconstructing a continuous time signal frorn its discrete-rime representation lies in the sampling theorem, as discussed in Section 7,1. Through the process of periodic sampling with the sampling frequency consistent with the conditions oF the ?jampling theorem, the continuous-time signal xAi) is exactly represented hy a sequence of instantaneous sample values xAnTY, that is, the discrete-time sequence x^[n\ is related to .^^(0 by

^^'1^1 - x,.UsT).

0^t^)

r
1 1
Xeffi
1 1 1 1 1

Conversion to ^tjff^l discrtt? time

yd["l

Discrete-time

Conversion lo

system

conttnouE- tune

Figure 7.T9 Discrete tin>e processing of continuous-tirne signals.

Sec 7.A

Dfscrete-Time Processing of Cont^nucus-Time Signals

535

The rransformation ofx^O) to xAnl corresponding to the first system in Figure 7.19 wiU be refemid to as continttous-tf^-discrer^'time conversion and wilJ be abbreviated C/D. The reverse operation corresponding to the third system in Figure 7.19 will be abbreviated D/C, representing discrete-rime to continuoHS-time conversion. The D/C operation perfbnns an incerpolacion between the sample values provided to it as inpuL That is, the d/c operation produc&s a coniinxious-time signal y^if) which is related to the discrete-lime signal yjLnl by
yAn\ = yAnT).
This nutation is made expUcit in Figure 7.Z0. In systems such as digital coiripviiers and
digital systems for which the discrete-lime signal is represented in digital form, the device
commonly used to implciment the CTDconvcrsionis refeircd to a& Ananaiog-ro-digiuit iAto-D) converter, and the device used to implement the D/C cori version is referr^ to as a
digitai-to analog (D-to-A) converter.

¨c(t)

C/0
Donvarsian
:.

v-dH = -- >^(T>T>

Vd.n] ^VcfrtT)

Djscrete -Tune

System

T

DfC conversion
i
T

Vctt)

Figure 7.20 Rotation for continLOus-to-discrete-tJme conversion and
(]lscrtC'to-cofitinuous-time conversioti, T represents the sampling psriod.

To understand further the relationship between the contmuous-time signal x^t) ^nd
i ts discreie-time representation x-d [n\ , it is helpful to represent CID as a process of pe riodic
sampling followed by a mapping of the impulse train to a sequence. These two steps are illustrated in Figure 7.21. hi the first step, repi^senting the sampling process, the impulse train Xp{i) corresponds to a sequence of impulses with amplitudes corresponding to the sait^ples ijf Xc{(} and with a time spacing equal to dte sampling period T. Jn the conver-
sion from the impul.'w: train to the discrete-time sequence^ we obtain jr</[¨], correspotiding to the same seqnence of samples of x^it)^ but with tmity spacing in terms of the new in-
dependent variable n. Thus, in effect, the conversion from the impulse train sequence of samples to the discrete-time sequence of samples can be thought of as a normalization in time. This itormalizaiion in converting Xp{t)t!Q JCrfi^J is evident in Figures 7.21 (b) and (c),
in which Xp{[) and x^[n\ are respectively illustrated for sampling rates of T ^ T\ and T = 2Ti.
It is also instructive to examine the processing stages in Figure 7.19 in the frequency
domain. Since we will be dealing with Foiihcr transforms in both co^tjiiuous and discrete time, in this section only we distinguish the continuous-tinie and discrete-time fre-
H quency variables by using tu in continuous time and in discrete time. For example, the
continuous-time Fourier transforms of jCf(r>and yc(i) are ^^(J&t) and Y^j}^), respectively,
while the discrete-time Fourier transfoims cf jcj[;r] and 3J^[nJ are X^ie^^^) and Y^U^^X
respectively.

536

>:cft}

C/D convwBion

P(tl

XpM

Corvwsior of impulse train
to discrete-timQ
sequence

SampJing

Chap. 7

K[n] = x^inl]

^P Ct)

{a}
T-T,

^oW

T = 2T

r^ L
".

, ,

"T' 1 '^"i

a T 2T
(b)

JL

''

T

2T t

-4-3-2-10123-4 n

1

Kjnl

^^ F"'

i^-i ^''

^'1

-** -3 -2 -1

1 23 4 n

Figure .7.21 Sampling with a periodic Impulse t^ain folfowMJ by conv^rsioo to a discrete-time sequence: (a) overall syston; (b) Jc^ff] tor two samplng rates. The dashed envelope ref>resents J(r(f); (c) the output sequsnoe for tt>e two differerrt ^afnpjing rates.

To begin let us express X^(yai)^ the continuous-time Founer transform of JCy,(f), in terms of the sample values of x^i) by applying the Fourier transfcjrm to eq. (7,3).
Since

fl= "^
and since the transfonn of 6(j' - nT) is e"-"^"^, it follows that

0.17)

(7.18)

Sec 7 4

Dtscrete-Tme Processing of Continucus-Tinne Signals

Now ugjisider the discrete- time Fourier transform of ;Cc'[rtJ> ^^^ ^s.

537
19)

or, using eq. (7.16),

= 23 X^{e'^^)

x,.\nT)e-^^^>

(7.20)

Comparing eqs. (7.18) and (7.20). we see that ^j(f-'") and ^/,(jfiJ) are lelaied through
(7.21)
Also, recall that, as developed in eq. (7,6) and illustrated in Figure 7.3*

(7.22)

Consequently,

i-- IC

(7.23)

The relationship among X^{jia),XJf{juJ), and Jfj(e-'") is illustrated in Figure 7.22 for two different samplmg rates. Here, Jf(/(f^**) i^i a frequency-scaled version of X^j(jaj>

Xc*H

x^ jw}
A

x,<iH
A ^A

T-L
A

2t

*f>

X,,Ui£)

A^1 A

-Stt

2Tr

fl

Xh [eJ^=)

Figure 7,22 Refationshrp between )(t:ih*),^p{h\^ and Xa{B'^\ for two different samg^ng rat¨s.

Vj[n]

538

Sampling

Chap 7

H and, in particular, is periodic in with period Zw. This periodicity is, of course, charac-

teristic of any discrete-tirne Fourier tT^nsforrn. The spectrum of xAn] is related ro that of

JCtU) through periodic replication, represented by eq. (7.22), followed by linear frequency

scaling, represented by eq. (7.21). The periodic replication is a consequence of the first

step in the conversion prccess in Figure 7.21, namely^ the impulse- train sampling The

linear frequency scaling in eq. (7.21) can be thought of informally as a consequence of

th^ norma(i7^tion in time introduced by converting fiom the impulse train .^^(0 to the

discrete-cime sequence JVj[n]. From the time-scaling property of the Fourier transform in

Section 4.3,5, scaling of the time axis by 1/r will introduce a scaling of the frequency

H = wT axis by T. Tbus£ the relationship

is consistent with the notion that, in converting

from Xf){r) to Hfj[nJ, the time axis is scaled by 1/T,

In the overall system of Figure 7J9, after processing with a discrete-time system,

the resulting sequence is converted back to a continuouii-time signal. This process is the

reverse of the steps in Figure 7.21, Specifically^ from the sequence ydM, a conciriuous-
time impulse train ypiO can be generated. Recovery of the continuous-time signal >;(0 from this impulse train is then accomplished by means of lowpass filtering, as illustrated

in Figure 7.23,

CVC canverston

Conversion of
dlBcrete-time
sequence to
Impu^ train

Vcffl
Figure 7.Z3 Conversion of a
discretB-tim^ sequence to a continuoustime signal.

Now let us consider the overall system of Figure 7.1 9, lepresenied as shown in Fig-

= ure 7.24. Clearly, if the discrete-time .system is an identity system (i.e., x^nl

v^lrt]),

then, assuming that the cooditions of the sampling theorem are met, the overall system

will be an identity system. The characteristics of the overall system with a more general

frequency response f/j(f-''* ) arc perhaps best understood by examining the representative

example depicted in Figure 7,25, On the left-hand side af the figure are the representative

HcW

^,!X)-

Jtnffl

ConwefSion of impul$9 train to sequenc:^

<dtnl

^aË'')

Ycl^]

Conversion of sequence to impulse tram

VpCt)

tU^ Li)
2T

>c(t)

Figure 7.24
lima nirer.

Overai; system 1or filtering a oontin nous-time spgnal using a discrete-

X

5:

-^

*,

-- ^^

-- ^ " _o E .

.

5%- Ý;

^ J* Is ^^

^ ¨n (A

:^^

>i t- "^ .

Co

EL"0
F=

E
ft

ra

___

= "--

-- u_

_^ -^-

^ BJ £

^ t .

a£ ^^i

^^ 3 = ij
^||5 =

539

540

S^rrpling

CWap. 1

< spectra Xt{yw)i Jf^(;^), and Xj(*'''^^), where we assume thai o^m ^i/2, so that there is
no aliasing. The spettniTn yj(<?''^^ )cOTTespoiidiTig to theoutput of the discrete-time filter is the product of ^j(f ''^) and Hjie^^^), and this is depicted in Figure 7,25(d) by overlaying Hiiie^^) and ^die^^^). The trans formation tti YiiJM) then eorresponds to applying a frequency scaling and lowpass filtering, resulting in the spectra indicated in Figure 7, 25(e) and (f). Shice Yif{e^^^) is the product of the two overlaid spectra in Figure 7.25(di, the frequency staling and lowpass filtenrig are applied to both. In comparing Figures 7.25(a)
an^l {fu ^e set that

K (joi) = X,(jw>//rf(fJ"^>.

<7.24)

Consequently, for inputs that are suffldently band limited, so that the sampling theorem iii satisfied, the overall system of Figure 7.24 is, in fact, equivalent to a continuous-time LTI
system i^ith frequency response HAj^) which is related to the discrete-time frequency
response H^fie^^^) through

^^^j^^={HAe^-'l H<o>,/2 > \u>\ w,Il

iltS)

The equirv alert frequency response for this continuous-time filter is one period of the frequency response of the discrete-time filter with a linear scale change applied to the frequency axis. This relationship between the discrete-time frequency response and the equivalent continuous-time tiequency respond is iUustraied in Figure 7.26.
The equivalence of the overall system of Figure 724 tu an LTI system is somewhat
surprising in view of the fact that multiplicalion by an impulse train is n^/a time-inv<iriant operadoo. In fact, the overall system of Figure 7.24 is not time invariant for arbitrary inputs For example^ if xAt) was a narrow rectangular pulse of duration less than T. then ^ tiitie shift fif X({t) could generate a sequence x[nl that cither had all zero values oi had one nonzero value, depending on the alignment Df the rectangular pulse relative to the

!rj

HH{e'")

m

-"c

A;

mHcli")

T

T

tn n 2tf
Frgure 7.?6 Discrete -time fre-
guency responsQ and the eftuivalent CDntinuous-tinne frequency tBsponse for the system of Rgi^re 7.2^

Sec. 7.4

Discrete-Ttme Prqcessing of Continuous-Ttm* Si(;nal&

541

sampling impulse train. However, as suggested by the spectra of Figuie 7,25, for bandlimifed input signals with a sampling rate sufficiently high s<? as to avoid aliasing, the system of Figure 7.24 is equivalent to a continuous-time LTI system. For stch inputs, Figure 7.24 and eq. (7.25) provide th& conceptual basis for continuous-time processing
using discrete-lime filters. This is now explored further in the context of some examples.

7.4.1 Digital Differentiator Consifier the <tiscrete-timÈ implementation of a continuous-lime band-limited differenti-
ating filter. As discussed in Section 3,9.1, the frequency response of a continuous-time
differentiating filter is
(7.26)
and that of a hand-litnited differentiatiyr widi cutoff frequency i^^ is

(7.27)
as sketched in Figure 7.27. Using eq. (7.25) with s. sampling frequency lu^ = 2iUf , we see
that the corresponding discrete-titne transfer Unction is

liAe^'')= j(^\ \a\<-n.

(7.28)

as sketched iti Figure 7.28. With this discrete-tinne tr^sfer function, ydO i" Figure 7. 24

xMi will be the derivative of

assuming that there is no aliasing in sampling xAt)-

£t

t^

<Hit,i:i*^)

Figure 7.27 Fre<]uency r^ponse

Of a contimious-time ideal band-limited

= < (irfferentiator Hcifm]

itit, |t^|

t>c

542

H(eJ")

sampinig

cnap. 7

-2^

2ti II

^ H(eJ''j
T
2

_ Figure 7.Z£ Frequencij respcrtse

O us^ of discrete-trme filter

to imple-

ment a cantjnuous-time band-limited

djtfererrtlator.

Example 7,2
By considering the output of the digital diJTerctJtiator for a continuous-Utn* sine input, we itiay convertieiuly determine the impulw response hAn] of the di&crete-vime tilter in
the implemeDtatiun of the digital dLffereQtiaK>r. With reference to Figure 7.24, let

where T is the sampling period. Then

smiTTtfT^
TTt

(7 29)

AW, ^) -

< \b)\ wfJ

jI

which is sufRclentl.y band limited to ensure that samplii^ ft(Oal frequency's = 2Tr/T
dOGH not give rise to any aliasing. It follows that the output of the digital differentiator is

d,

cos(Trf/r) tiiv(ir(/r)

030)

For X. (J) as given by eq.O-^^), the ccfnespondiing signal jrj[n] in Figure 7,24 may
^ be expressed

xAfi] = M^T) = j&[n].

(7.31)

wMe Thar is, for ¨ ^ 0, xA/tT) = a

= j:j[01

;r,(0) =

whictican be verified by I'Hopital'srule. Wccan similarly evabiate yj[rt] in Figure 7.24
corresponding to y^t) in eq- (7,30). Specitically

f-ir
yAn] - yA/iT) =

n#0
n=

(7.32)

'

Sec 7.4

Disaeie-Ume Processing of Continuojs-Tlme Signals

5*3

=0 which can be verified for n 7^ by direct substitutioEi into eq. (7.30) and for n

by

application of L'Hopitars rule..

Thus when the input to the discFete-time filter given by eq. (7.28^) is the sc^ed

We unit impul&e in eq. (7.3J), the resulting output i* given by cq, (7,32).

then conclude

that the impulse response of this filter i& given by

(-ir

0,

= fl

7.4,2 HaJf-SampJe Delay

In this section, we consider the impleihentation of a time shift (delay) of a continuous-time signal through the use of a system in the fo(rm of Figure 7^19. Thus, we require that the
input and output of the overall system be related by

Mr - y,{t)

- A)

<7.33)

when the input JcAt) is band limited and the sanptit^g late is high enough ro avoid mak-
A ing atMl where represents the delay time. From the time-shtftitig property derived In
Section 43.2

From eq. (7.25), the equivalent continuous-lime system to be implemented must be band limited. Therefore, we take

HAJ^} -

.-JiaA 0,

otherwise

(7.34)

HAM) where ^, is die cutoff frequency of the continuous-dnie filter. That is,

corresponds

tQ a time shift as in eq. (733) for band-limited signals and rejects all frequencies greater

than tOf. The tnagnitude and phase of die frequency response are shown in Figure 7.2^a).

With the sampling frequency to^ taken as oPj ^ latf^, the corresponding discrete-time

I Hd(e'^)

1

1

Slope A

I)
< Hd(eJ")

(a)

(b)

Figure 7.29 (a| Magnitude and phise of the frequBncy response for a
continuous-lime delay; (t)} magnitude and phase of ttie frequency response
far th$ oorrespondinfl discrete-time delay.

544

Sampling

Chap. 7

frequency response is

H^ye^^')^ ^->^^^^, |nj<7r.

(7.35)

m and is ^htiwn Figure 7,29(b).
For app(ropriately band-limited inputs, the output of the system of Figure 7.24 wirh Mjie^^^) ds in eq. (1 ^5) is a delayed replica of the input, Fori/7" an integer, the sequence y\i\n] is a delayed replica of jc^^Iji]; that is.

yAa] ^ ^j "'f

036)

For A/T not an integer, eq. (7,36), as written, has no meaning, since sequences are denned

on^y at inttgej values of the index. Howe^ver, we can interpret the relationship between

xj[n] and yj\tt] in these cases in terms of band- limited interpolation. The signals ^^(0

and Xtt\r.] are related through sampling and band-limited interpolation, as axe \\{f) and

yjM yAn]r With HAe^^^) in eq. (7.35),

ts equal to samples of a shifted version of the

band-liTTiited interpolation of the sequence Xft[n\ This is illustrated in Figure 7,3C with
^T = 1/2, which is sometime^ refen'ed to as a half-sample delay.

I
T 2T

>:^(t)
Xj|n]^Xc(nT)

urn T 2T

VcW ydInl =

= xJ[n--|fT]

1^

Figure 7,3[> (a) Sequence ot samples Of a continuOLis-time signal xM): (b) sepuence in {z) with a half-sampJe
delay.

ExampJe 73

w The approach in Example 7.2 is also applic^le detenniniDg the impulse response
hj[n\ f)f the discrete-timt filter in the half-sample delay system. With referenct to Fig\xk124. let

xAO = ain(7rJ'/r)
TTt
It follows from Example 7,2 that

(7.37)

xAn] - x,(nT) = -5[flJ

Sec. 7.5

Samplins af Discrete-Tltne Signals

545

Also, since ihere ts no aliasing for the badd-limit<MJ input in eq. (7.37), the output of the half-sample delay system is

y,it) ^ .Ji - Tf2) ^
and the sequence )'j[/i] in Figure 7.24 is

^.-m '

We conclude that

7.5 SAMPLING OF DrSCRFTE-TlME SIGNALS
Thusi far in this chapter, we have considered the sampling of coniitiuous-time signals, and
in addition to developing the analysis necessary to understand continuous-time sampling,
we have introduced a nutnberof its applications. As we will see in this section, a very similar set of properties and results with a number of important applications can be developed
for sampling of discrete-time signals,

7.5.1 Impulse-Tt^al n SampJi ng

In analogy with cuntinuous-time sampling as carried out using the sysietn of Figure 7.2^
sampling of a discrete-time signal can be represented as shown in Figure 7.31 . Here, the new sequence Xp{it] resulting from the sampling [Woccss is equal to the original sequence
N ;cL;i] at integer multiples of the sampling period and is zero at the intermediate samples;
(hat is.

Xp[n] =

x[ti], 0,

N if n = an integer multipJe of
otherwise

.^ ^q.

As with continuous-time sampling in Section 7.1, the effect in the frequency do-
main of discrete-lime sampling js seen by using tlie multiplication propeny developed in Section 55. Thus, with

^ Xpln] = x[n]p[n] =

^if^^M" - f^l

(? 39)

we have, in the frequency domain*

2^ J2ir

546
x[n]

*- ^Jp]

GampljnQ

Chafj. 7

llllllllll

TT r

it[n)

11

Pin

I

1

1

1

I

I

1

LJ

L >:p[n]
r^

Figure J,3t
sampFing.

Discrefa-time

As in Example 5,6, the Fourier transfonn of the samphng sequence p[n] is

^ ^ P{en =

^t" " *^^^'

(7.41)

where 6>jT the sampling frequency, equals lir/Nr Combtning eqs, (7.40) and {7AU. we
h^ve

/^-t
x^un - ;^Z^K'' '*'^*)'
it=0

(7.42)

Equation (7,42) is Ihe counterpart for discrete-time sampling of eq. (7.6 f for
concinuous-time sampling and is illustrated in Figujt 7.32. In Figure 7.32c^c>, with
-- > ¨^ ttJM (WjH, or equivalently,Èi>T "> 2*ij>^, there is no ali^^ing [i.e., the non^ery portionsn of the replicas of X(f^"> do not overlap], whereas with ttt^ < 2o>!^. as in Figure 732(d),
frequency-domain aliasing results. In the absence of aliasing, X(e^) is faithfully repro-
duced around w = and integer mnJtipIes of 2tt. Consequently, jlnj can be recovered
N from Xp[n] by means of a lowpass filter with gain and a cucoff frequency greater than

Sec. 7.5

SampJinp of Discr^te-Tinne Signals

^
-Si

Xfen
ik
£££M (a)

2z

1

Lt

i

547
Z\
2ir (it
t1

^ y\ /\ yK /\ /\ /\ 3ir V^

Figure 7, J2 EffKit in the frequency domain of impulse train sampling of a
discrate-time signal: (a) spectrufn of original ^tgnai; (t>) spectrum of sampling
> sequence; (c) spedrum a1 sampled signal with ats Zmu, (d) spectrum of < $ampl^ ^Igna) wtth o^, 2<^. Note that aliasing occlfs.

tujif and less than to^ -- btyf, as illustrdted in Figure 7.33, where we have specified the
cutcfT frequency of the lowpass filter a^t£,/2. If the overall system of Figure 7,33<a) is ap-
< plied to a sequ&nce for whicti w., 2wm, so that aliasing results, Xr[n\ will no longer
b& equal 10 ;x[fly However* as with continuous-time sampling, tht two sequences will
be equal at multiples of the sampling period; that is, corresponding to eq. |7.13), we
have

independently of whether aliasing occurs (See Problem 7.46)

(7.43)

548

Sirr^pling

Ch^p. 7

x[n]-
^x
-air

MX)

* H(i(i£)

(a)

Jf(io)

yK

-¨n

^M

>^fJ.J*^)

*-Mnl
/X 2lT w

^X ^217

X^c^)

J^

-WM

0£|y

z:s_
217

Figure 7.33 Etcact recovery of a discmte-tinie signal from Its sampled Ufi-
m an idsal lowpass filter (a) block diagram for sampling and fsoonstructjort

af i baMf-llmit¨d signal trom its samples; (b) spectmm of the signal x[u].

(c) spoctruRi of Xp[n]\ {^) frequency response at an Id^l low^^ inter with

^e cutoff frequency t£sf2; (e) spectrum &f tfie reconstructed signal Xf[n]. Far
> sxamplQ depicted here oj^ 2aiif so that no aliasing occurs and consequentfy

= Xf[n]

x[{tl

Example 7<4

Consider a sequence x[ii] whcse Fourier transform Xie'") has the ptopertii diat

y(eJ¨) =

È ^ for 2iT/9

iw|

IT.

Sfic. 7 5

Sampling o1 Discrete-Time S^grals

S49

To determine the lowe&l rate at which x[n^ may be sampled v^ithcut the posfvibility of alLasJng, we must find the largest A^ such that

We conclude that N^ubx = 4, and the corrcsporniing sampiing ftequeticy is 2Tr/4 ^ ir/l.
The reconstruction of i[n] thrt>ugh the use ot a lowpass filter applied to Xp[n] can be interpreted in the time dotiiain as an interpolation formula similar to eq, <7 11 ). With h[n] denoting die impulse response of the lowpass filter, we have

The reconstmcted sequence is then

IT a>cn

or equivaJently,

- -Vr[n] > Ji[kN]---

it^^

^

-----.
^'^^^ ~ *^^

(7.46)

Equation (7.46) represents ideal band-limited interpolation and requires the implementiition of an ideal lowpass filter. In typical applications a suitable appro Jtitnatioti for the lowpofis filter iti T-igure 7.33 is used^ in which case the equivalent interpoJation fonnula is of the fomf)

X Mfi] =

^['t^]'ir[¨ - JtN],

(7.47)

where hAn] is the impulse response ofthe interpolating filter. Some specific examples, in-
cluding the diKCreLe-time cwunteipaxts of the zero-order hold and first-order hold discussed in Section 7.2 for continuous-time mterpolation, are considered in Problem 7.50.

7.5.2 Discrete-Time [>ecinrkatfon and InterpoVation

There are a variety of important applications of the principles of discrete-time samplings
such as in filter design and implementation or iti communication app]ii:ations. In many
of these applications it is inefficient to represent, transmit, or store the sampled sequence Jip[n] direcdy in die form depicted in Figure 7.31, since, in between the sampling instants,
JCj)[n] is known to be zero. Thus, die sampled sequence is typically replaced by a new sequence Jri,["]j which is simply ever> Nth value of Xp[n]., that is,

xdn] = x^inN].

(7 48)

Also, equivalent iy,

xAn] = x[iiNl

(7.49)

550

Sampling

Chap. 7

since Xp[n] and x[n] are equal at integer muttiples of A^ The operation of extracting every
Mh sample is commonly referred to as ^Jct/wKj/ion.^ The relationship between x[n], Xp[n],
and Xh[n] is illustrated in RgiKC 7.34.
Tb determine the effect in the frequency domain of decimation, we wish to determine
-- -- the relatiotiship between Xtfi^^'^) tJte Fourier transform of j^fnl and X{e^*^). To this
end^ we note that

X XU^"") =

^^t*]^"'*'*

k = -f

or, using eq, (7,48),

^ = Xb(e^*^)

Xpikl^e-j"^'.

i = ^[E

If we l¨t n = kN, or equivaletitiy Jt =^ n/N^ we can write

(7 JO)
(7.51)

and since Xp[ri\ -

nv inkigef N multiple nf
when n is not an integer multiple of N, we can also write

a.52)

t
lllflTtlll

K[n]
ll

S^n]

rl 1

1

1

,

lllll

J^n)
Figure 7.34 RalatJonship betwa¨n
Xp[n] (forrsspoflding to sampling aod Xbitt] corrBSpcinding to decimation.

^Technically, deciituddin wQiiLd coirespooid to HtractiEig tvefy tentf\ s^napic. However, i( has become
N commoii tconiijolDgy to refer to the opetadon as deciinBtJt>a eveq when is not equal to 10.

Sec 7.&

S^iTipling of Discrete-Tinie SiQ^ial^

551

^ Furthermore, we recognize the right-hand side of eq. (7.52) the Fourier transfuiin of
jt^jTjirt]; that is,

;r J¨]^->'^^ = XJe^'^'^'l

a-53)

Thus£ fromeqs- (7.52) and (7.531, we conclude that
(7.54)
This relationship is illustrated in Figure 7.35, and from it, we observe Lh4t the Hpettra f^ir the sampled sequence and the decimated sequence differ only in a fre^ue^cy scaliag or normalization. lf,the originaJ spectnnn X{ef*") is appropriately band limited, so thai there is no alia^sing present in Xp(e^^\ih&a,as shown inthefiguren the effect of decimation is to
spread ths spectrum of the original sequence over a larger portion of the frequency band.

rX

X{ei-)
t*>M
x.(e^^J

Zs.

IT

2tT

cu

-Nw,

tJuH IT

Figure 7.35 Frequency-d amain illustration of the rfitationship between
tripling and decimatian

ff the original sequence y:{n\ is obtained by sampling a contiriuous-time signal, the
process of decimation car bt viewed as reducing the sampling rate on the signal by a factor ofN. To avoid aliasing, X{fJ'^) cannot occupy the full frequency band. In other wyrds, if the signal can be decimated without introducing aliasing, then the original continuous-
dme signal was over^am pled, and thus, the sampling rate can be reduced without aliasjing.
With the intcrpretittion of the sequence xln\ as samples of a cotitinnous-tiine signal, the process of decimation is often refeired to as down^mpling.

55Z

J(o(H

i:AnvQf^art

ffl[nl

Discrete tktna low pass "Ntter

X, Jt^)

*-yan]

Wm
x.(e^

Sampling

Chap- 7

-2^

H^e^'}

-2Tr2

t:^
-2ti

&}
-U>r Wf

2tt

*^

2ti

(d

Ci

2Tr

to

Figure 7.36 ContmuDUS-time signal that was oHginalty sampled at the
Nyquist rate. After dtscrete-tirre tiltaring, the resulting sequence can be
further downtampled. Here X^iM
IS the continuous-time Fourier trans-
'orm of Mtl Me^) and Me'" I are
the discrete-time Fourier transforms :>f Xa\n\ arwJ Vfltn] ra^pectlwety^ and Wd{e^} IS the frequency response of the discrete-time lowpass filter depicted in the block diagram.

Tn some appJicattons in wtiii^ti a sequence is obtained by sampling a contlnuou^titne signal, the original sampling rate may be as low as possible without introducing

aliasing, but after additional processing and Altering, the bandwidth of the sequence

may be reduced. An example of such a situation is shown in Figure 7.36 Since the

cm output of the discrete-time filter is band limited, dowtisampling or decimation

be

applied-

Just as in some applications it is useful to downsample, there are situations in which

it is useful to convert a sequence to a higher equivalent sampiing rate, a process referred

ttJ as upsarr^ling or interpolation. Upsampling is basically the reverse of decimation or
downsampling. As illustrated in Figures 7.34 and 7.35^ in decimation we first sample and then retain only the sequence values at the sampling instants. To opsample, we reverse the process* For example, referring to Figure 7.34, we consider upsampling the sequence
N jcit[n] to obtain x[n\. From T^[n], we form the sequence Xp[n] by inserting - 1 points
with lero amplitude between eat:h of the values in Xb[i\]. The inteipolated sequence jx[n] is then obtained from Xp[ti] by bwpass fUteritig. Tt^ overall procedure is sununarlzed in

Figure 7.37.

(A

01

CQ

a.

-^ ="

3
I

È
tt

2

I

1= ksi

UO
^ È3
t|
I?

SS3

SS4

Sampling

Chap. 7

Example 7.5
In this example, we illustrate how a combination of itileipolaiion and decimation may be used to further down&ample a sequence without incuiriag ali^siitg. It ^Ihould be nottd that m^xinmm pos.'vible downsanipling j.^ achieved once the non-zero portion of one period
f tht discrete-lime specimm has expanded lo n fi die entire band from -ttiott. Consider the sequence x[n] whose Foutiei: trartsform Xie^'^ ) is illustrated in Fi gure
7.3Sfa). As discussed in Example 7.4> the Lowest rate at which iuiplilse'train sampling may be used on this sequence without incuiiing aliasing is 27rM. This corresponds to
X{^-)

-TT

2iT

Stt

9

"9

9

IT

1 67T 2lT

9

XJ^}

-2^

^Gn -TT eir

9

9

9

9

2v

Ui

^Je'-)

--TT

TT

IT

9

99

1 Ttt 2tt

b>

9U

\^^ \ ^f .^r^ix

Xub<^)
^^^

J
* **

-Ett

-^

(]

TT

Zti

(IJ

(d)

Figure 7.3& Spectra associ^ed wiih Example 7 S. (a) Spectrum of xln], (b) spectrum after dowRsimplmo by 4, (c) spectrum after upsamplJriQ x[n] by a factpr cf 2; (d) spectrum after upsarapling x[n] by 2 and then downsampling by 9.

-

Sec 7 6 Sunnmary

SSS

iampling every 4th value ot x[ny If tlic result of such s^mplin^ is <kximated by a fagtor

of 4, w-c obtain a Kquence J&[n] whsse spectrum is shown in Figure 13S\b). (Sisauiy.

there i^ still no aJiafiing of the origina] spectrum. However, this spectrurr. is zero for

^ ^ Sir/9

fa>|

TT, which suggests there is room for further downsampljng.

Specifically^ exanLiiiing Figure 7.38(a> we seo that if we i^uald scale fruquency

by a factor of 9/2, the resulting spectrum wouLJ have nonzero values ovtr the entire

frequency interval from -tt la 'Jt. However, ^incc 9/2 is oot ati iuteger, we can't achieve

this purely by do^vttSEt^nptiiig. R^ithei we must flr^t upsample x{n\ by a facLor of I and

then downsiuuple by & fiu;toTGf9, In particular, the speccrum of the .signal Ji^[n] obtained

whe^ x[n\ is upsampled by a factor of 2, is displayed in Figure 7.3S<t;^^ Whtu Jf^irt] is

then dawnsEunpled by a factor of 9, the spectrum of the resulting sequence jf,,,,(fll is a^;

showa in Fi^re 7.38(d). This coinbined result effectively corTe<£p(inds to downsampLing

x[h\ by A noninte^er amDuntn 9/2. Assuming thaf jc[n] represents unahascd samples [jf

a continuous-time signal x, (t)^ our interpolated and decimated sequence represents the

maiiiTnum possible (aliasing-free) downsamplingof JC(.(/).

7.6 SUMh/lARY
In this chapter we have developed the concept ^rsanipling, whereby a continuous-lime or discrete-time sigtia.1 is represented by a seqiienc:e of equally sp^ed &amples. The con-
ditions under which the signal is exactly recoverable from the samples i$^ embodied in the sampling theorem. For exact leconstructioTi, this theorem requires that the signal to be satnpled be bat^d limited and that the sampling frequency be greater than twice the highest frequency in the signal to be sampled. Under these conditions, exact reconstruction of the original signal is carried ouc by tneans of ideal lowpass ftlterlng. The time-domain inteipretation of this ideal reconstruction procedure is often referred to a.s ideal bandlitnited interpolation, [n practical implementations, the lowpass fiher is approximated and the interpolation in the tiirie domain is no longer exact In some instances, simple inter-
polation procedures such as a zero-order hold or linear interpolation (a first-order hold)
suffice.
If a signal is undersampled(i.e,, if the sampling frcquenc> is less than that required by the sampling theorem), then the signal reconstructed by ideal band-limiced interpolation will be related to the original signal through a foam of distoition referred to as alia.'iing.
In many instances, it is important to choose the ^lamphng rate so as to avoid aliasing.
m However, there are a variety of important examples, such as the stroboscope, which
aliasing is exploited.
San^LpUng has a tmmber of impiTtant Applications. One particularly >^ignificaju set
of applications relates to using sampling to process continuous- time signals with discrete
time systems, bymeansof ininicompuiers, microprocessors, or any of a variety of devices
specifically oriented toward discrete-time signal processing.
The basic theory of sampling is similar for both continuous-time and discrete-
time signals. In the discrete-time case there is the closely relied concept of decimaLitm, whereby the decimated sequence Is obtained by extracting values of the original sequence
at equally spaced intervals. The difference between sampling and decimation lies in the
fact that, for ih& sampled sequence, values of zero Ue In between the sample values, whereas in the decimated sequence these zero values are discarded, thereby conipressing
the sequence in time The inverse of decimation is interpolation. The idea* of decima-

SS6

Sampling

Chap. 1

tion and mteipolation arise in a variety of important practical applications of signals and systems, including communication systems, digital audio, high-delinition television, and many other applications.

Chapter 7 Problems
The first section of problems belongs to the basic category, and the answers are provided in the back of die book. l>ie remaining two sections ^otttain problems belonging to the basic and advanced c^egorics, respectively.

BASIC PROBLEMS WITH ANSWERS

A 7.1, real-valued signal x{t) is known to be uniquely determined by iu samples when
the sampling fi^ueticy is w^ - 1 0.OOO-n-^ For what vaJues of oi is X{}m) guaranteed
to be aero?
A 7.2, contintious'time signat xix) is obtained at the output of an ideal lowpass filter
= with cutoff frequency *i£f l,0007r. If impulse-train sampling is performedonx(f)£
vvhich of the following sampling periodLs would guarantee diat x{t) can be recovered from its sampled version using an appropiiate lowpass fiUer?
<a) 7 = 0.5 X 10"^ (b) 7 = 2 X 10"^ (c) r = 10-^

73, 11£c frequency which, under the sampling theorem, niust be exceeded by tbe sam-

pling frequency is called the Nyquist rate. Determine the Nyquist rate corresponding

to each of the following signals:

^ (a) xit\

\ 4- cosCZOOOw/) -h sin(4,O00Tr/)

= (b) x(_n

siQi4v0O02ii

lA, Let jf(/) be a signal with Nyquist rate i^o. Determine the Nyquist rate for each of the

followiDg signals:

- ^r (fl) xit] -H

1)

^ (b)

(c) x\t)
(d) x{t]cosiiiiyt

7,5, Let ;c<Obc a signal with Nyquist rate wo- Also, let

U - y{t) = x{r)p{t

6

Chap, 7

Problerns

557

where

^ pit) -

Sit- fiTX and r <

Wo'

Specify the constraints on the magnitude and phase of the fr^uency response of a filter that gives i(t} as its output when y{t) is the input. 7.<k In the system shown in Figure P7.6^ two functions of time, x\{t) and J2(0, arc multiplied together^ ^md the product nit) is sampled by a periodic impul&e train, jt] (r) is band limited to bij, and X2U) is band limited to ot^i ^^^ i^i
^ ^iU^) -- Oh |aj| wt.

T Determine: the maximum sampling itHerval such that h'(/) is recoverable
from Wp(0 through die use of an ideal lowpaas filter.

xim
xa(t)
XiOu.)

¨(t)

fit,
p{t)=i &{l~nT) n ñ -w
*-Wptt)

Xj(iQ>)

W1

U^ Ci>

-Q^

*^** Figure P7.

7.7.

A signal x(t) undergoes a zero-order hold operation with an effective sampling pe-
riod T to produce n signal xo{t). Let jt|<0 denote the result of a first-order hold
operation on the samples of Jf(^); i.e..

X JC](0 -

A£Tyhi{i-nTX

where ft|(/) is the function shown in Figure P7.7. Specify the frequency response of a filter that produces x\{t) as its output when xo(t] is the input.

558

hid) 1

Sampding

Chap 7

T t Figure P7.7
7.S, Consider a reaJ, odd, and periodic signal x(t) whose Fourier series ^presentation may be expressed as

Let x(t) represent the signal obtained by performing impulse-train sampling on xit)
using a sampling period uf T = 0.2.
<a) Does aJiasing occur when this impulse-train sampling is performed on x(r)?
(b) If x{r) is passed through an ideal lowpass filter with cutoff frequency ir/T and pas&bandgain T, determine the Fourier series representation of the output signal
Sin.
7.% Consider the signal

x(0 = sinSO^rA^ TTt I'

which we wish to sample with a sampling frequency of ^j = ISOtt to obtain a
signal g[t) with Fourier transform G(yftj). Determine the maximum value of wo for
which it is guaranteed that

Gijof) = 75X(jta) for \w\ :^ ton,

where Xiju}) is the Fourier tiEuisform of x{ty

7-10. Determine whether each of the following statements is tme or false:
-- (a) The signal jr(f) = u(t -h To) u(S - T^y} <;an undergo impulse train sampling

< without aliasing, provided that the sampling period T 2T(,r

<b) The signal x{t) with Fourier transform X{j<a) = u(fo + ojo) - uitu - to^:) can

undergo impulse-train sampling without ahasing* provided that the sampling

T < period

itf(i>^.

(c> Thesignal j:(r>withFouriertransform;f(;id) = u(Èo)-u(aj -iiJoKan undergo

impjlse-train sampJuig without aliasing, provided chat the sampling period T <

xM 7JL Let

be a continuous-time signal whose Fourier transform has the property that

> A X^{j<ii) = Ofor|iu|

ZOOOtt. discrete^tirte signal

XdW = Jtf(nCa5x 10"^))

Chap, 7

Prablems

559

is obtained. For each of the following constraints on the Fourier transfonn X^ie^")

of XdW* deternune the cv>iTesponding cotvstraiiit on Xtijti>y

(a> Xj(f^*^)isrcar

(b) The maximum value of Jf^(f^" J over all w is L

^ <c) Xrf(fi^) = for

^1(^.1^ TT

A 7.12, discrete-time signal x^iln] has a Fouricir transform Xjie^*^) with the property that

^ ^ h Xfiir^^) = For 3t/4

j^^l

tt, T1¨ signal converted into a contitiuous-time

Èigrial

where r = 10 ' ^. E}etermine the values of m for wl:uch the Fourier transform Xdjot)
of Xi (/) IS guaranteed to be zero.
7.13, With reference to tire iiliering approach illustrated in Figure 7.24^ assume that the
sampling period used is T and the input xdi) is hand liinitedj so thai Jf^ {Jm ) = for
^ |w| 7r/r, Ifthe overall system has (he property that jf(t) = JTfCr-ZrXdetemiine
the impul$e response h\j}\ of the discrete-tinie fiHer in ingure 7.24, 7-14. Repeat the previous problem, except tfiis time assume that
4-0

7.15. Impulse-train ^amphng of x[n\ is used to obt^n

^ g[n\ =

x[n]d[n - k^.

^ ^ If Jf(^^*^> = for 3ir/7

|w|

tt, determine the largest value for the sampling

interval A^ which ensures that no aliasing takes place while sampling x[n\.

7.16. The following facts are given about the sigtial x[n[ and its Fourier transfomi:

1* x[n\ is real.
2. X(f^") ?^ foi

< ¨ < TT.

Determiiie x[nh You may find it useful to note that the signal (sin ^n)/iTrn) satisfies
two of these conditions.

9

560

Sampling

Chap. 7

7,17. Consider an ideal discrete-time bandstop filter with impulse response h[n] for which
the frequency response in the interval --tr^fo ^ ir is

Hie^) =
0, elsewhere
Etetermine the frequency response of the filter whose impulse response is h[2n]. 7.1S. Suppose the impulse response of an ideal discrete-time Jowpass filter with cutoff fre-
quency Tr/2 is interpolated (in accordance with Figure 7.37 ) to obtain an upsampUng by a factor of 2. What is the frequency response corresponding to this upsampled
impulse response?
7A9. Consider the system shown in Figure P7,19, with input x[n\ and the coiresponding output y[n]. The zero-insertioti system inserts two points with zero amplitude betweeneachof the sequence values in x\n]. The decimation is defined by
y[n] = w[5nl
where w[n] is die uiput sequence for the decimadon system. If the input is of the form

x[n] = nn
determine the output y\n\ for the following values of *£!

x[n|

Zero insertion

H(e''^)
1

w nj

1--

-TI -tt/5 ir/5

11

Figure P7.T

Dadmatlon

yl-^J

7£20, Tw'o discrete-time systems S^ and 52 are proposed for implementing an ideal lowpass filter with cutoff frequency -rrfA. System S{ is depicted in Figure FT. 20(a). System S2 is depicted in Figure P7. 20(b). In these figures, Sa comesponds to a zeroinsertion system that inserts one zero after every input sample, while Sb connesponds to a decimation system that extracts every second sample of its input. (a) Does the proposed system 5i correspond to the desired ideal lowpass filter? (b) E>oes the propused system S^ correspond to the desired ideal lowpaAs filter?

Cliap, 7

Problems

Jt[nl

^[n]
Sb

1 H(eJ*t
s*

-ir/8 & ir/a
(af.

UMi^/(eJ^£ij£t

1

Sa

-
-ir^ ir/2

S61
Sb
y[n]

U_/<J^^ I' i

-it/?

tf/È

yM

Rgure P7.j!0
BASIC PROBLEMS
A 7^1, signal x{t) with Fourier transform XO^t*) undergoes impulse-train sampling to
generate

where T = Id'* . For each of the following sets of constraiute on ;ic(0 and/or X{jta\

does the sAmpling tbeorem (see Section 7, 1. 1 ) guarantee that x(r) cah be recovered

&iactly from Xf,(T)'7

(a) XOw) = forlwl > 5000^

(b) XiM) x= Ofor |w| > I50007r

= M > (c) (R*{J!f(ytt))}

Ofor

5CX)0ir

MO > (d)

real and X(/iii> =^ for ai 500(hr

<e) ^(0 rea] and X(ja>) = forw < -ISOOOtt

M (f) A'Cjto) * Xijo)) = for

^
> ISOOOtt

> (È> |X(;w)| =^ forw ^OOOtt

7,22. Hie signal y{t) is generated by convolving a band-limitod signal jri{0 ^th another

band-lin^ited sigtial jc2(0> that is,

where

XdM) =0
Xiijto) =

> for [o^l lOOOir > for [*rjj 2000^.

Impuise-train sampling is performed on yit) Co obtain

^

5 62

Samplmg

Chap. 7

n=--

Specify the range of values for the sampling period T which ensures that >(/) is
recoverable from yp(t).

7,23, Shown in Figure P7-23 is a system in which the sampling signal is an impulse train with ^tematiog sign. The Founcr transform of the input signal is as indicated in the

figure,

A < (a) For

7r/(2tUjw), sketch the Fourier transfonu of Jp(r) and y{t}.

A < (h) For

7r/<2atAf ), detennine A system that v^iU recovei x(t) from Xp(t).

A < (c) For

^/(2fti^), dfttermine a system that will recover x(t) from y(r).

ww (d) What is the maximum valu& of A in relation to

for which xU) can be recov-

. er^ from either Xp(t) or yit)?

MU

x(t).

H[}b>]

y[t)

p{t)

t

J"

1

i-

X(jc*j)

"M

Wu CD

.H(ia;) 1--

-TT

5e "*

AA

Figure P7.23

7,24.

Shown in Figure F7.24 is a system in which the input signal is multiplied by a

periodic square wave^ Tlie period of j(f) is T. The Input signal is band limited with

^ = |X(^¨>)| Ofor|ft£|

WM.

Chap. 7

Problemc

56a

(a) For A = 7/3^ determine, in tcnns of tuw > the inaAimuin value of T for which
th^tt is no aliasing anu>ng the replicas of Jf(^up) in W(y<(t).
(b) For i = T/4t determine, in terms of WAf, the maximum value of Tfor which
there is no aliasing among tbe replicas i>rX(jC[r) iw W{)o>).

Jiftl

<E)

*-wft)

5t)
s{tl
d^^

TMffl

ngurv P7.2A

1:2s, In Figure P7 25 is a sampli^r, foJb wed by an ideal lowpass filter, for reconstruction of jic(r) from its samples jc^<r) From the sanipFiitg theorem, we know that if Wj = IttIT
is greater than twice the highest frequency present in x{i) and w^ = m^fl, thea the

reconstructed signal Xrit) will exactly equal xit). If this condition on the bandwidth

We of x{i) is violated, then jCf(f) will no^ equal x{t).

seek to show in this problem

that if ¨>;: = Wj/2, ttien for any choice of T, xAt) and xit) will always be equal at

dee sampling instants; that is,

xAkT) = xikTlk = 0, ÝL Ý2,....

p{t) = S S(t-OT}

J^rC*)

Figure P7.25

Ty i?btain this resuJt. consider eq. (7.1 1 ), which expresses Xrit) iti teirms of the
sainplesof xii):

/*;

nDl ^"^

r -r\-r'^r sinftt>f(l -

~^ -- IT ~-^

ir bi^it- nT)

^ With v>i a)s/2^ this becomes

^ T,(0 -

sinj^^(f-n7) ^(/iD

- "^>
Y(*

(P7.25^I)

564

Ssmpliflg

Chap 7

hy considering the values of a tor which [sin{a)\/a ^ 0, show fmm eq.
(P7.25-1) that, without any rejitriction^ on x(t), xAkT) =^ JiikT) for any integer
value of A.

7.26^ The sampling theorem, as we have Jciived it, states that a signal Mt) loust be sam-

pled at a rate greater than its bandwidth (or cquiv^ently, a t^c greater than twice its

highest frequency). This iiripJies that if x(0 has s. spectrum as indicated in Figure

MO F7.26(a) then

tnust be >iampled at a rate greater than 2^^. However, s;ince the

signal has most f>f its energy concentrated in a narrow band, it would seem reason-

able to expect that a sampling rate lower than twice the highest frequency could be

used, A. &igna^ whose ene^iy is concetitraied in a frequency band is often referred to

as a handpasx xigrmi. There are a variety of techniques for sampMng such signals,

generally referred to as bandpasi-sampling techniques.

^M
1-
AK
(a)

p(t) = IS(t^nT)

xft)

*-(x

¨D<tJ

Hfjcu)

x,m

pft)

I

1 'I

t

I-

T

Hiju>)

A-

Figure P7.26

Chap. 7

Prabtem&

565

To e^umine the possibility' of sampling a bandpass signal as ^ rate less than

the total bandwidth, consider the system shown in Figw:ie P7-26(b). Assuming that

> CO I

W2 ~ ^ 1 £ ^t)d the ntaxtmum value of T aud the values of die constants A, Wa,

= and ia^ such that Xr{t^ xit).

7.27. In Prc^lem 7.26, we considened one procedure for bardpass sampling and recon-
structioa. Another procedure, used when x{i) is real, consists of multiplying x{t) by a
complex-exponential and dicn sampling the product. The sampling system is shown
< < in Figure P7 .27(a). With xii) real and with X{jta) nonzero only forwi |w| <t£2.
^ the ti%quency is chosen to be ato (1/2)(qj^ -4- tniX and the lowpass fiJter H^{jto) ha5 cutoff fircquency (l/2)Cft>2 ^ wi)-
(a) For Xijtit) as shciwn in Figure P7.27(bX sketch Xpijbi).
^m 0>) Determine the maximum sampling period T such Aat x{t) is recoverable

(c) Determine a system to recover x{t) from x^{t).

-Ë^

p(t)^:E6(t-nn
ta]

X(i4U)

1--
A
-¨2 -tti^
(bj

K

(l>^

Qlj

Figure P7.27

7.2S, Figune P7.2S(a) shows a system that convens a continuous- dme signal to a discretetime signal. The input xit) is periodic with aperiod of 0. 1 second. The Fourier series
coefficients of xit) are

^*l

¨*

=1
(2 I

>-"<*<+*.

Hie lowpass filter ff(ya>) has the frequency respunse shown in Figure P7,28(b). The
samphng period 7" = 5 x 10~^ second.
(a) Show that x\_n\ is a periodic sequence> and determine its period.
0>) DetermiTie the Fourier series coefficients of x{h\.

566

Sampling

C^ap. 7

of an impulse train
to a

*- x[rT] = \,fnT)

pft}=i&fl-nT)
fa)
HUoj)

-20511

205Tr

UN

(b)

FBgure P7.28

7^9, Figure P7 .29(a) shows the overall sjrstem for filtering a continuous-ume signal using

a discrete-time
UT = 20 kHa:,

filter If Jf^O)
sketch Yp( jo,),

and H(È^'^) are y{^>>, K(^>),

as shown in
y^(y^), at£d

Figure P7
Y^U^X

29(b)

with

^^^ X,(t)^^Xp{t) Conversion toa sequsnoa

-- h[nj "

Conversion

fc

to an

impulse train

yp(i)

H( wj T
-ir/T ir^

ycffi

n ^ -I

Xj(jw)

(a)
H(eJ-)

-3t

4

<i>

{b)

Figure P7.29

Chap. 7

Probfflms

567

730- Figure P7.30 shows a system consisting of a continuous-time LTl system followed by a sampler, conversi<jii to i sequence, and an LTI distretc-timc system. The contJnuouS'time LTI system is causal and satisfies the linear, eonstani-coe0cieit(
differential equation

yM dyAO +

= x,it\

dt

The input Xi(0 is a unit impulse 6(r).

(a) Detenrdne 3'c(?).

(b) Determine the frequency response //(eJ"> and the impulse response h[n\ such

= thaiH'[fj]

biri\.

J^ctt]

y=(t)

LTI

^<x

yN Convflr$(onof
imipulsa iram

LTI

toa

sequence

wN

^(l|

p{\y = i^\-Ta)

ytn] = V, (nTj

Figure P7.30
731. Shown in Figure P731 k a system that processes continuous-time signals using a
digital iilter h[n] that is linear and causaj with diffeience equation
y[n] = -yln- l]-^x[nl
> For input signals that are band limited such that AVQw) - for \<o\ trlT, the
system in the figure is equivaletit to a cotitinuous-time LTI system. Determine the frequency response Hdjt^} of the equivalent overall system
with input xdO ^TM1 output ydt).

X1

Conversion of
x[nj
£ imputso Ir^n

ti\n]

m Corvversion of
y[nl

kteal lowpass

sMiuenca

ftfter cutoff

toa

rr^oquency

s¨queoce

impulse tram

yc{t)

pm-XBtt^nT)

a 7 JjL agnal jc[n] has a Fourier transform Xie^^y Ihat is zero for (ir/*)
Another stgrtal

S |up]

TTh

56a

Sanpiing

Cftap. 7

^ gM - x[n] Hn-\- Ak]
t=

is generated. Specify thejrequent^y respoji&e /^(f^" ) of a lowpass filler that produces
x[n] as output when g[n] is the itiput.
A 7J3. signal x[n] with Fourier transfomi Xie^^^i has the property that

^ Uu] B[n-3k}y

= 4rt].

For what values of at i& it guafanteed that X{e^^) = 0^

A 734.

real- valued discrete-tLiriE signal x[n] has a Fourier transfonu Xie^*^) that is zero

^ ^ for 3 tt/ 14

|cl£|

tt. The noncero portion of the Fourier transform of one period

< of Xie^*^ ) can be made to occupy the region ]w| tt by first perfonning upsampling

by a factor of L and then performing downsampling by a fector of A/. Specify the
values of L and A/.

735* Consider a discrete-lime sequence x[n] from which we fonn two tifiw sequences,
Xp[n] and j:j[n], where Xp[n] con-esponds to sampling x\_n\ v,ith a sampling period of 2 and Jj[/t] corresponds to decimating x[n] by a factor of 2, so that

and

_= xJfi\

J^[n].

0,

n = Ý1, Ý3....

xA^] = x[2n].

(a) If jt[fl] is as illustrated in Figuire P7 J5(a), sketch the sequences jc^ln] and x^[n]. (b) IfXieJ"^) is as shown in Figure P7.35(b). sketch Xpie^n and X^e^*^).

¨[nt
*^.^ Tiilii.irlii

(a)

Xfe"")

^^

11^ ^217

5tt

Bit

4

4

4

(b)

Sit

4

4

2-TT

11 tr 4

Kigure P735

ADVANCED PROBUEMS

^ 7.36 Let jf(f) be a band-limited signal such that ^(ja>) = Ofor|w|

f.

(a) If x(t) is sampled using a. sampling period J", determine an interpolating function

Chap. 7

Problems

569

g(/) such that

= y, xinTMT - nTl

(b) Is the function gO) unique?

< W A 7 J7.

signal Limited in bandwidth to (*tj|

c^i be recovered frflm nonunifomily

spaced sample;; aft long as the average sample density is 2{Wn.ir) ^ampLeg per sec-

ond. This problem iilus^trates a particular ^xaniple of nonuniform sampling. Assume

that in Figure P7. 37(a);

> L ^(0 is bajid limited; Xijio) - 0. jwj IV.

^0 2.

is a Tionunift>rml> spaced periodic pulse train, as shown in Figure P7.37(b).

2WW. 3. fit) is a periodic waveform with period T =

Since /(/) multiplies an

= impulse train, only its values /(0> = a and /(A> = A at f

and t ^ i, re-

spectively, are significant.

4. Hyijw} is a 90* pha^se shifter; that is,

//,(£ [^.. CU <0

m

x{t}.

'ˋ

P(i)

1
rKE> Vitt)

Hi(jto}

(a)

VsW
y3^tJ

Hj(io)

*- zfn

2tt
W

(/ -2ttt^A)

P[t)
M
1

u
Stt /2-tt
W (^-^)

{W

Ffgur* P7,37

570

Sampling

Chap. 7

H2U^) 5.

is an ideal lowpass filter; that is,

W i/^O) "= \ K\ -

< < tt>

.

K where isa. (possibly complex) constanc.
(a) Find the Fouriei transforms of p(f)j yi (r), >'3(')£ and >';i(/)-
^ A = (b) Specify the values of a, i*, and as functions of such that z<i) x(t) for any
band-limited xit} and any A such that < A < tt/W.
738. It Ls frequendy neces^a^ to display on an oscilloscope screen waveforms having
very short time structures--for example^ oti the scale of thousandths of a nanosecond. Since the rise time of the fastest oscilloscape is longer than thi:^, $iich displays
cannot be achieved direcdy. If however, the waveform is periodic, the desired lesuU can be obtained indirectly by using an instrumenc called a sampling oscilloscope.
The idea, as shown in Figure P7 . 38( a) , is to sample the fast waveform x(t) once each period, but at successively later points in successive periods. The increment
A should be an appropriately chosen sampling interval in relation to the bandwidth
ofx{t). If the resulting impulse train is then passed through an appropriate interpolat-

m

PoriocHc with

period T;

X = OcflJ

I

I

for CO >W¨

I

I

<H)

H(>ai)

*-y(t>

pit) ^ Sa[t-nfT-^i)]
IJiuK
D, elsewhere
(t£)

FJgure P7.BB

Chap. 7

Problems

571

ing lowpasi. filter, the output y{0 will be proportional to the original fast wavcfoim

< slowed down orstreiched out in time [i.e., yit) is proportional to x{aT\ wherea IJ.

For x{t) =^ A + B cosKZ-jt/D/ + e), find a range of values of A such that y(0

a< in Figure P7. 38(b) is proportional to xiat) with

\. Also, determine the value of

a in terms of T and i.

A 7,39 signal Xp{t} is obtained through impule-train sampHt^g &f a sinusoidal signal x{/)
whose frequency is equal to half the sampling frequency Wj.

- yf ^r)

tti,

cos|

-f

and

24^

J^(0 -

^('£r)6(f - nT)

^ where T'

iTr/tit^.

(a) Find ^(r) such that

x{j)

=

cos(0)cos(-ir
(Ë')

+^0^

(b) Show that

- gtflT*)

for H = 0, Ý 1. i2, -

(c> Using the results of the previous two parts, show that if .v^(f) is appUed as the input to an ideaJ lowpass filter with cutoff frequency tv^/l, the resuUing output
IS

>(/) = cos(<^)cosL^r

7.40, Consider a disc on which four cycles of a sinusoid are painted. The disc is rotated at iipproximately 15 revolutions per second, so that the sinusoid^ when viewed dirough a narrow slit, has a frequency of 60 Hz. The arrangement is indicated in Figure P7,40. Let v(t) denote the position of the line seen through the slit. Then
v(0 = AcGs{u(it +(^X<uu = t207r.
Position of line varies £nuaoidalty
at 60 cycles per second
I
Dtsk rotatirtg at
15rps

Figure P/.40

572

Sampling

Chap. 7

For itotational convenience, we will nomiaUze v(^) so that A = K At 60 Hz, the eye
is not able to foDow v{r), and we will assume that this effect can be explained i>y
modeling the eye as an ideal lowpass filter with cutoff frequency 20 H^. Sampling of the smusoid can be accomplished by iUutninating the disc with a
strohe light. Thus, the illumination can be represented by an impulse train; that is,

where 1/r is the strobe frequency in henj. The resulting sampled signal is the prod-
uct K') " v{t)i(t)- Let Rljio), V{jija\, and I{ju*\ dennte the Fourier transforms of
r{t), Wf), and l{t\ respectively.
(a) Sketch V(ja>), indicating clearly the effect of the parameters 4> and wo(b) Sketch J{}<f>\ indicating the effect of T.
(c) According to the sampling theorem, tiicre is a maximum value for T in terms
of W[> such that v{t) can be recovered from r{f\ using a lowpass filter Etetemiine
7 this value of and the cutoff frequency of the lowpass filter. Sketch Rijm ) when T is slightly less than the maximum value^
If the sampling period T is made greater than the value determined in part
(c)^ aliasing of the spectrum occurs. As a resuJt of ihi$ aliasings we perceive a
lower &ei|uency sinusoid.
(d) Suppose thai ItrfT = + ft^c 2(hr. Sketch Rijm) for |ft*| < AOtt, Denote by v^it) the ^spar^nt posidon of the tine as we perceive ti. Assuming that the eyE^ be-
haves as an ideal lowpass filter iwith 20-Hx cutoff and umty gain, express ^rAi^ in the form

where Aq is the apparent amplifude, u^ the apparent frequency, and <ii^ the
appartnt phase of Va{\).
(e) Repeat part (d) for lir/r = wo - ZOtt.

7^1. In many practical situations a signal is recorded in the presence of an echo, ^hich we

would like to remove by a|^>ropriate processing. For example, in Figure P7.41 (a),

we illustmtc a system in which a receiver simultaneously receives a signal x{t) and

an echo represented by an attenuated delayed replication of xit\ Thus, the receiver
< output is j(/) = xU) + - aj[(/ T\}\ where |ai 1. This output is to be processed to

recover ji{t) by first converting to a sequence and then using an appropriate digital

filter h[n\ as indicated in Figure VIA\^).

Assume that xix) is hand limited [i.c.^ X(jit>) =

< \a\

1.

> for |cu| ojaj] and that

(b> If To < -n-Zw^^andthesamplingperiodistakentobeequal to ro(i.e,,r = To),

<fe:temune the difference equation for the digital filter kin] such that >v(f> is

proporti<inal to Jf(r).

(b> With the assumptions of pait (a), specify the gain A of the ideal \owpass fiUer such that y^Cr) = jt(0.
(c) Now suppose that iriticn,^ <To < lir/iau. Determine a choice for the sampling

peiicd T, the lowpass filter gain A, and the frequency response for the digital

filter h[n] such that y^t) is proportional to Jf(f).

1

Cha^j.T

Problems

&73

s^tt) = ¨{t)+flx(t-T(J

a K[t-Toi
. >^ZJ
Receiver OLitput
<a}

Ideal towpass
filter

Conversion of sequence
to imptjise trajn

yp(tj

p<tj = i,6{t-kT) k- -=:
(t>)
Figure P7 .4
7.42, Consider a bat^d-Hmited signal xdO that is sampled at arate higher than the Nyquist rate. TTie samples^ spaced T seconds apart, are then converted to a sequence x[n]^
as indicated in Figure P7.42,
p(t)-y6<t-nT)

itc(t)

Kp(t)
-(H>

Convefsion of tmpuhs& train tcseqgence

*- n{w] ^ x^. inT)

Figure P7.42
DeieimiJM the relation between the energy È^ of the sequence, the energy E, of the original signal^ and the sampling interval T. The enei^y of a sequence x[n ] is defined as

^ and the energy in a continuous-time function xA^) ^^ defined

574

Satnplmg

Cha^i 7

7.43. Figure P7.43^a) depicts a system for which the input and output are diicrete-time

signals. The discrete- time input :t[¨] is converted to a continuous-time impulse train

Xpit)r The continuauS'time signal Xpit) is then fiLceredby an LTE system to produce

the output yAf), which is then converted to the discrete-time signal y[n]. The LTI

xM system with input

and output y^ (f) is causal and is characterized by the linear

constant-coefUcient differential equation

dt^

dt

The overall system is equivalent to a causal disciete-time LTI system, as indicated in Figure P7,43(H
Efetertnine the frequency response H{^'^) and the unit sample response ft[n] of the equivalent IXI system*

Kin]

Conversion to an
impulse tram

x,,<t}

i a(t-nTj
n - -=
Kp{l) = lK[n]fi{t-nT)

M[n|

(a*
h[n];H(en LTI syBtem

Figure P7.43

7,44. Suppose we wish to desigii a cotitinuous^tinie generator that is capable of pFoduciog
sinusoidal signals at any frequency satisfyiog

^ È aj|

ct^

titjt

where it^i and a>2 are given positive nmnbers.
We Our design is to take the foUowin^form: have stored a discrete-time cosine
-- wave of period N\ that is, we have stored ^[0], . , . > jt [^V 1 ], where

Ch^p. 7

Problems

575

^[/:] = <^o^\^j
Every rsecotiis we output an impulse weighted by a value of jc[Jt], where we proceed through the values ofjt =OJ,...H/V-liiia cyclic fashion. That is.
yikT) = ;f(jt modulo AT),
orequivalendy,
yikT) = ^oJ^
and

(a) Show that by adjusting T, we can adjust the frequency of the cosine s^nal being sampled. That is. show that

2^ ypiO = tcos*t*o/£

S{t - kT).

where wn = T Itt/NT. Determine a range of values for such that >'(r) can rep-
resent samples of a cosine signal with a frequency dial i$. variable over the full range

^ ii>\ '^ ta

W2.

(b) Sketch ^^(yQj).
The overall system for generating a continuouS'tinie sinusoi<I is depicted
in Figure P7.44(a). H(j<x>) is an ideal lowpass filter widi unity gain in its passband; that is.

H(Jta) -

1,

< |ftj|

ti>c

0. otherwise

K[0!
* * ñ
m
)t[N-1|

^\
>p(t)
T
ñ

(a)

H(jtu3

^ ym
m

Figure P7£44

*- o(N
(b£

COBliJt

576

Sampting

Chap. 7

h The pardmeter <(>t is to be determined so that >^') a continuous-rime cosine
signal in the desired frequency hand,
(c) Consider any T value, of in the range dctennined in part (a). Determine the
N rninimum value of and some value for <ac such that yU) is a cosine signal in
the range oj] :^ nf :È u^2^
id} The amplitude ofyd) will vary^ depending upon the value ofoi chosen between wi and tii2* Thus, we must design a system Gijio) that normalizes the signal as shown in Figure P7 .44(b), Find such a G{jai}.
X 7,45, In the system shown in Figure P7.45, the input xdO is band linnited with (M) =
> 0, \tt>\ 2-n- X lO'*. The digital filter h[n] is deseribed by the input-output reUtion

Xc(t)

Mt)

Converston to a
sequenoe

p(t^- l6<t-nT)

t Hn)

y[n]

Conversion to ar
kripulse train

yJt)

H[Ko)
T

VAX)

Figure P7,4S

k T -:

(P7,45-l)

(a) What is the maximum value of T allowed if aliasing is to be avoided in the
transformation ft-om xj/) to Xp(j}. (bt With the discrete-time LTI system specified through eq (P7,45-l), detemiine
its impulse response h[n].
(c) Determine whether there is any value of T for which

^ lim y\_n]

lim f jCc<t) Jr.

(P7.45-2)

If SO, determine the maximimj value. If not, explain and specify how T would
be chosen so that the equality in eq^ {P7.45-2) is best approximated. (Think
carefully about [his part; it is easy to jump to the wrxjng conclusion!^
A 7Ab signal x[n\ is sampled iw discie£ic time as shown in Rgure P7.46, hA n] is an ideal
low pass filter with frequeitcy resporise

Hrien -

1
0.

IwK^ J<|w|<^

From eqs, (7.46) and (7,47), the filter output is expressible as

Chap. 7

Problems

577

x,[ilj

p[n] -S6{rt-kN)

Figure P7.46

where w, = InfN. Show th^ independent of whether the sequence x[n\ is sam-
m pled above or below the Nyquist rate, XrCm/^] - x[mN'\. where is any positive or
negative integer

^ lAl. Suppose jt:[rt] has a Fourier transform that is zero for 7r/3

s Show \ii>\

tt.

that

-

/sinCf(rt-3ft)>\

7.4&. If4¨] = cos(J/i+<^)withO s <^<2Trajnig[n] = ;r[nJXt=-^5['£-4Jt]> what
^ additional cotistramis must be iinposed on to ensure that

g[n]*

- xM?

1A9. As discussed in Section 7.5 and illustrated in Figure 7.37, the procedure for interpo-

N lation or upsampling by an integer factor can be thought of as the cascade of two

N operations. The first operation, involving system j4, coiresponds to inserting

1

Kero-scquence values between each sequence value of x[n\, so that

71 = Q,ÝN,Ý2N,..
Qtlterwise
For ejtact band-limited intetpolition^ Hie^*"} is an id&al lowpass fiher
(a) Determine whetfier or not system A is linear. (b) Determine whether or not system A is time invariant. = (c) For Xd(*J") as sketched in Figui^P7,49 and with jV 3, sketch :t^(c^'^).
W (d) For ^ 3> Xd^fJ") as in Figure P7.49, and Hie^*^) appropriately chosen for
esact band-limited interpolation, sketch X(f^").

1
~tr

ii> Figure P7.49

S7d

Sampling

Chap- 7

7,50. Tn this problem, we consider the discrete-time counteqpans of the zero-order hold and

first-order hold, whith were discussed for continuous time in Sections 7. 1 .2 and 7.2.

Let x[n\ be a sequence to which discrete-time saitipling, as illustrated in Fig-

ure 731, has been applied. Suppose the conditions of the discrete-lime sampling

> theorein are satisfied; that is, w^ 2ti>M, where ¨(>i is the sampling frequency and

= < ^ X{ef^)

0, iiij^

\<o\

TT. The original signal j([rj\ is then exactiy recoverable

from Jf/,[n] by ideaJ lowpass filtering, which, as discussed in Section 7.5, corre-

sponds ro band-litmted interpuiation.

The zero-order hold represents an approxiitiate interpolation whereby every sample value is repeated (or held) A' - 1 successive times, as illustrated in Figure
P7.50ta) for the case of Af - 3. The first-onjer hold represents a linear interpolation

between samples, as illustrated in the same figure.

MI

K\n
li

^[^1

I

f-*-Ën

t-Ë*

Jtoln

m MIT r '^^^l

ZOH

n

>(p[n]

]mm m .-t^
rfT 1 1

-^^"^^
1 11 1

(a)

ZOH

t>fl[nl (b)

J^oln] ^[n].
FOH

H(ei-)
fc)

^tpfr].

hi(n] <d)

nJn]

FOH
K[n]
Rgure F7,50

,

Chap. 7

Problems

579

(a) The lero-order hold can be represented as an interpolation in the form of eq. (7.42) or, equivalently, the system in Rgure P7 .50(b)- Determine and sketch
M hn[rt] for the generaJ case of a sampUng period
(b) x[n] can be exactly recovered from the 7Èro-order-hold sequence xoin] using an appropriate LTI filter H(È^")^ as indicated in Figure F7,5(Xc>, I>etermine and
sktidiF(tJ*").
(c) The lirst-order-hold (linear interpolation) can be represenied as an interpolation
m in the form of eq (7.42) or, equivalently, the pystem Figure P7,50(d>, Deter-
mine and sketch k] [n] for the general case of a sanr^jiing period .V. tdj x[ ft] can be exactly recovered from the flrst-order-hflld sequence x [n] using an
[
appropriate LTI filter with frequency response H{e^*^). Deterrfiine and sketch

7S1. As shown in Figure 7.37 and dascussed in Section 7,5.2, the procedure for inter-
N polation or upsampling by an integer factor can be thought of as a cascade of
two operabons. For exact band-limited interpolation, the filter Hie^*^) in Figure 7.37 is an ideal lowpass filter In any specific application, it would be necessary
to implement an approximate lowpass filter In this problein, we explore some use-
ful constraints that are often imposed on the design of these approxitnate lowpass
filters,
(a) Suppose that Hie.^'^) is approximated by a zero-phase FIR Klter The filter is to be designed vith the t:onstraint that the original sequence values Jt/[n] get
reproduced exaiHy; that is^

^ x\fi\

Xti

,/t ^ 0,ÝL Ý1L.^..

(P7.51-1)

This guarantees that, even though the interpolation between the originai se-

quenLie vulues may not be exact, the original values are reproduced exactly in

the interpolation. Determine the c&nstraint on the impulse response h[n] of the

lowpass filler which guarantees that eq.(P7 .,'51-1) will huldex^dy for any se-

quence ^Tjfln],

Now (b)

suppose that the inteTpolation is to be carried out with a lineiir-pfuise,

causal, symmetric FIR filter of length N\ that is

h{n\ =i},n<\y,n> N -\.

(P7.51-2)

HU^'") = HAe^'^y ^"""^

(F7.31-3)

where Hfiie^"*) is real. The filter is to be designed with die constraint that the
original sequence values j7^1¨] get reproduced exactly, hut with an integer delay a, where rt is the negative of the slope t>f the phase of //(c^*^); that is,

x[n\ = Xd

""
L

\n-ot

=0,ÝU

Ý2Z, . ,

(P7,5l-4)

N Determine whether this imposes any constraint on whether the filter length
\^ odd or even.

1

S80

Sampling

Chap. 7

(c) Again, suppose that the interpolalion is to be carried out with a linear-phase^ causal, symmetric FIR filter, so that

where Hnie^"") is real. The filtej is to be designed with the constraint that the original sequence values x^i^^ gel reproduced exactly, but with a delay Af that
is not necessarily equal to the slope of the phase; that ia,

x[n\ - x^ n - Of 1

M = 0,ÝZ^r2i.....

N Deieimine whether this imposes any constraint on whether tiie filter lengA is
odd or even.
7*52 In this probletti we develop the dual to the time-domain sampling theorem, whereby
a time-limited signal can be nftconstructed htiva frequency-domain samples. To t'e-
m velop this nssult, consider Ae frequcncvnionriatn sampUc^ operation Figure P7 .52.

X(ia.).

<S>

^ ^ - Xli^i]) X(HP(ju.) I Xtl^two) 6tw-kMol

5<{W

p^^\

1 1 1 1 1111

utQ 2u>(]

oi

i xr:.ni-'^

f if

O

Wg 2ll>(|

Figure P7.SZ

Chap. 7

Problems

SB1

(a) Show that

^0 = x{0 * pit)

where x{0. -tCO, and p{r) are the inverse Fourier transforms o{Xij<xt), X{jei)},

and P{J<ii)) respectively.
(h> Assuming th^t xiO is timfi-limited so that x(ty =

for \t\ ^ ^, show that x{r)

cran be obtained frorti ^[t) Ehtxiugh a "low-time windowing*' operation- That is*

t(0 = x(t)w{t)

where

(c) Show th^ x{() is not rccoveraWe froni Ji(0 if ,t(f) is not con^straiited to be zero

^ for If

^.

j

I

I

ton

8
Communication systems

S.O INTRODUCTION

BB2

Communication systems play a k^y role in our modem world in transmitting information
between peopJe. systems, and computers, [n genend terms, in ail communication systems
the information at die source is fiist processed by a transmitter or moduJator to change it into a form suitable for transmission over ihe communication channel. At die receiver, the
signal is then recovered through appropriate processing. Tliis processing i& required for a variety of reasons. In particular, quite typjcaliy, any specific communication channel has
associated with it a frequency range over which ic is best suited for transmitting a signal and outside of which communication is severely degraded or impossible. For example,
the atmosphere will rapidly attenuate signals in the audible frequency range (10 Hz to 20
kHz), whereas it will propagate signals at a higher frequency range over longer distances. Thus, in transmitting audio signals such as speech or music over a communication channel
that relies on prop^ation through the atmosphere, the transmitter first embeds the signal through an appropriate process into another, higher fi^uency signal.
Many of the concepts and techniques we have developed in the earlier chapters of
this test play a central role in the analysis and design of communication systems. As with
m any concept that is closely tied a wide variety of important applications, there are a large
number of detailed issues to be considered, and* as indicated in the bibliography, there are many eicellent texts on the subject. While a full and detailed analysis of communication systems is well beyond the scope of our discussions here, with the background of the
previous chapters we are now in a position to introduce some of the basic principies and
issues encountered in the design and analysis of these systems.
The general process of embedding an inftjimation -bearing signal into a second signal is typically referred to as modulation. EKtr^ting the info rmadon -bearing signai

.

Sec. 8.1

Complex E^iponent^al and Stnusoidal Amplitude Modijlation

563

is known as demodulation. As we will see, modulation techniques not only allow us to

embed mfontiaiion into signals that can be transmitted effectively, but also mate possible

the siniulEaneous transmission of more than one signal with overl^ping spectra over the

same channel, through a concept referred to as multiplexing.

TTiere are a wide variety of modulation methods used in practice, and in this chapter

wc examine several of the most impottant of these. One large class of modulation meth-

AM ods relies on the concept o\. amplitude modulaiion or

in which the signal we wish to

A transmit is used to modulate the amplitude of another signal. ver^' common furm of am-

plitude modulation is sinusoidal amplitude tm?ditla.iion^ which we e^^ploie in some detail

in Sections 8.1-8.4 tctgether with the related concepts of frequency-division multiplexing.

AM Another important class of

systems involves the modulation of the amplitude of a

pulsed signal, and in Sections 8.5 and 8.6 we examine this form of modulation as well as
the concept of nme-divi$ion multiplexing. In Section H.7 we then exjitiine a different form

of modulation, namely sinusoidalfrequency moduiation in which the information -bearing

signal is used to vary the frequency of a sinusoidal signal

All of the discussion up through Section 8.7 focuses aLlention on continuous -time

signals, since most uansmission media, such as the atmosphere, are best thought of as

continuous-time phenomena. Nevertheless, not only is it ptissible to develop analogous

techniques for discrete-time signals, but it is ot considerable prat:tica] importance to con-

sider modulaticn concepts involving such signals, and ia Section 8.S we examine sonie of

the basic ideas behind the communication of discrete-lime signals.

a. 1 COMPLEX EXPONENTLAI. AND SfNUSOIDAl. AMPLITUDE MODULATION
MiL^j communication systems rely on the concept of sinusoidal amplitude modulation, in which a complex exponential or sinusoidal signal r(r) bxs its amplitude multiplied (modulated) by the information -bearing signal ^(0 The signal x{t) is typically referred to as the moduiatin^ signal and the signal c\t) as the carrier signal. The modulated signal y{t\ is then the product of Lhese two signals:

As we discussed in Section R.O. an important objective in modulation is to produce a

signal whose frequency range is suitable fur transmission over the ctimmunication channel

to be used. In telephone transmission systems, for example, long-dLstance transmission is

often accomplished over microwave or satellite linLs. The individual voice signal.^ are
in the frequency range 200 Ha :o 4 kHz, whereas a microwave link requires signals in

the range 300 megahertz (MHz) to 300 gigahertz (GHz), and commmiicatic-n satellite

MHz links operate in the Frequency range from a few hundred

to over 40 GH/.. Thus,

for transmission over Ýese ehannels, the information in a voice signal must be shifted

into these higher ranges of frequency. .A.s we will see in dils section^ sinusoidal amplitude

modulation achieves such Ý shift in frequency in a very simple manner

BAA Amplitude Modufatton with a Complex Exponential Carrier

There are two common forms of sinusoidal ampUtude modulation, one in which the c amer
signal is a complex exponential of the form

= c{t)

(:>^'f+^.i

(8,1)

sa4

Commirrrication Systeins

Chap d

and the second in which the carrier signal is sinusoidal and of the form

In both cases^ the frequency Wc is referred to as the carrierfrequency. Lei us consider first
the case of a comple;t exponential barrier, and for convenience, let us choose 9i_ = 0, so
that the modulated Signal is

y{S) = x(tW"''.

(8.3)

FroTT) the nmltiplication property (Section 4.5)£ and with Xijtii). Yijoj). and C(jai) denoting the Fourier transforms of xit), yit), and citX respectively^

ztt
Fflr c(i) a compJex exponential as given in eq. (8.1),

(S-4)

and hence.

(8.5;

(*1^6)
Thus, the spectrum of the modulated output yit) is simply that of the input, shifted in frequency by an amount equal to the carrier frequency w^ . For example, with X{j<At] band limited with highest frequency o^^yf (and bandwidth 2ww), as depicted in Figure 8. 1(a), the output spectrum Yijtf}) is that shown in Figure 8. 1(c).

X(to)

A
0*
S-TT
1

1--
{(*(,- WfJ tUc (tilc-l-Q>J
(c)

Figure S. 1 Effed in the trequtncy

domain of amplituda modulation with a

campIeK exponential carrier, (a) s^c-

iruni of modulatmg signal x{t)\ (t)

^ spectrum of cirrier G(t)

ei"<^^\\t\

ft*
spectrum of amplitude- moc^ulated srg-

Sec 8 1

Corrplex Exponential and Sinusoidal AmplFtude Modulation

585

^rom eq. (83), it is t;leuT tinat ^</> c:an be recovered from The modulated signal yO) by multiplying by thi; complex exponential f"^"'-'; that is,

^(0 ^ >'(0f"-'"^'^

(8.7:

In The frequency domain, this has the effect of j^hifting the spec:rutn of the jnodiilLiled signaJ
bac;k to its original position on the fregueney axis The protest of tecQvering the original signaJ from the modulated signalis referred to as demoduUftian. a topic we disc us ^ at more
length in Section 8.2. Since ^^'' ' is a complex .signal, cq. (8,3j can be rewritten as

y(0 ^ ic(r)cosai, / + jx(t)slUoJ^t

S,8)

Itnplemeijtation cifeq. (y.7)or(8.iiJ with .ir(Oreai utilizes twosepai^te multipliers an<ltwo sinusoidal carrier signals that have a phase difference of tt/Z, as depicted in Figure ft .2 for
c{r) given by eq. (8.1). Iti Section 8.4 we ^ve an example of one of the applications in
which there are particular advantages lo using a system, such as in Figure 8.2, employing two Sinusoidal carriers with a phase difference of 7r/2.

C03C(Dcl+ ^c)
*- (R^ |y(l)'

t %) + sin[(ijf,t

*- ^^;y(t)L

Figure B.2 Implementalion of am-

plitude modulation ^viih a compiex ex-

ponential carrier c{t)

-

"'' e-'-'"''^

8. 1.2 Amplitude Modulation with a Sinusoitial Carrier
[n many sitijatitms, usittg a sinusoidal earner of tht fonn of eq. (8.2) is often Kimpler ^.han and equally as effective as using a complex exponential carrier In effect, u^mg a ainusoidaJ
earner citrresponds to retaining only the real or ijnaguiary part of the output of figure iJ.2.
A .system that uses a ^i^LLsddal carrier is depit;ted in Figure 8.3.

cca{(È)(.t-l-e^)

>ift)

83 Figure

.Amplitude modulation

(^j

with a sinusoidif earner.

The effect of amplitude modulation with a sinusoidal earner in the form ofeq. tR.2) can be analyzed in a maimer identical tu that in the preceding siibset:tion, Agahi, for

5S6

CammLinicatian Systems

Chap. 3

cronvenience we choose 9( -- 0. Tn tKis case, the spectrum of the carrier signal isi

= C(jw)

- + + irr5(ai <oJ dita iD,.)].

(8.9)

and thus. frt>m eq. 1^34),

YiJ^) ^ ^[Mjoi - >r) + Xijoj + M)J

(8.10)

Wi th X{jiO ) as depic te d in Figure 8.4( a) , the spectrum of y(t ) i s that shown in Figure 8.4( c\

Note that there is now a replication of the spectrum of the origmaJ signal, centered around

my huth +(c>, and -^, Asaconsequence. .v(r) is recoverable fr<i

(0 only if ÈÈ>>/ > w,, since

otherwise the two replications will overlap in frequency. This is in contrast to the case of a

compleK exponential carrier, tor which a replication of the spectrum of the original signal i&
centered only around iOj^. Specifically* as we saw in Section ^,1,1^ in thecase of amplitude modulation with a complex exponential carrier, .x(t) can always be recovered from y(t) for any cht>ice of tij^ by shifting the specmim back to il^ original location by multiplying by e ^^ '^ as in eq. (8.7). With a sinusoidal earner, on the other hand, as we see frcin Figure S.4, if att < tit^t, then there will be an overlap between the two replicabons of X(^((j). For examplcT Figure 8,5 depicfs Yijw) for ^^ = tUjij/Z, Clearly, the .spectrum of xU) is no longer replicated in V(jai). and thus, itmay no longer be posnsible to recover x{t)

frL>m y{t).

L

1
*^iA (a)
Qjtoj
TT
<jS.

(c)

BA Figure

Effect in the frequency

dcmain of afnplitude modulation with a

sinusoidal carrier: |a] spectrum of

modulating signal y{t): (b) sp&drum

= of carrier c{t]

ccsof^t, (cj sp&ctrum

of ampiJludemodulaied signaf.

Sec. S 2

AM DeTifldulatJon for Sinusoidal

sa?

t^M

Cltpj

Ul

(a)

.^1,, -U.
(b)

Figure 8.5 SinLSOid^t amplitude

wj modutation vmTn carrier cos

1or

which ojc = iMiu/2: (a) spactrum of

modulating signal; ib) spectrum of

modulated siQnal.

8.2 DEMODULATION FOR 5JNUSOIDAL AM
Al the receiver in a toinmiJnication system, the infoirmaiioii-beariTig signal x{t) is recov-
ered througli demodulation. In this s^iioti, we ejtamme the process of clemodalaLiLm for
sinusoidal amplitude modulation, as intT<>duce<J in the previous section. There aie two commonly used methods for demodul^tirn, each with its own advantages and disadv mintages
In Section 8,2. 1 we discuss the first of these, a process referre<i to as jsyfichranaus demod-
iiiaixon, in which tht transinitleT and rectiiser are synchronized in f^E^se. In Section 8.2,2, we describe an alternative method referred to as asynchnmous demodulation.

8.2. 1 Synchronous Demodulation
Assuming that w^ > iii^^ deniudulation of a signal that was modulated with a sinusoidal
cairier is relatively itraighttbrward. Specifically, consider the signal

= y(0

.r(Ocosti£^./.

;8.n]

As was suggested in Example 4,21, the oiiginal signal can be re^rovered by modul^itin^ y(,0 with the same sinusoidal earner and applying a lowpass* filter to the result. To see this,
consider

= wit)

y{t) CVS to (.r.

i8.12>

Figure 8.6 shows the spectra of y(r) and ^0, and we observe that jf(/)cati be recovered
frx^m w(t) by applying an ideal lowpass filler with a gain of 2 and a cutoff frequency that
-- is g.reateT than tsj ,^ :j.nd le^^ than Iw^ <^m- The freqxitncy response of the It^wpaa;^ ft Iter
is indicated by the dashed line in Figure 8.6(c:), The hasis for using eq. (S,12) 4ind a lowpass filter to detnodulate v(0 t^an also he
seen algebraically. From cqs. (8.1 1 ) and (8. 12), ir follows that
W(t) = X(t)CiK-(0,t,

.

588

Yfjuj)

Communication Systems

Chap. 8

(*^^c-^m) ^a>

*^c K+*^m)

C{jw)

TT
i

tt^.
(b>
W(ja.)

^2t>,

wr^

*^M

(^i^o-'^) 2*^^

FigtNTc 8.6 Demodulation af an ampfitude- modulated signal with a sinusoidal carrier (a) spectrum of modulated signai; (b] spect urn of carrier signal, (c) spectrum o-f modulated stgrai (tmitipiied by the carriflr The dashed line indicates the frequency responss of a owpa&s filler used to extract ttie de-
mod uiated signal,

or, using the tngoi:it>metric identity

11^

^ + COS2 OJ^?

i^

^zCOS-ZtiJ^^

^2

we can rewrite w(s) as

MO = 2^(0 - :^J(r)cos2tu,T,

(113)

Thus, w(f) consists of the sum of two Eerms, namely one-half the original signal and one-
ha^f the iiriginal sigTial modulated with a sinusoidal carrn^r at twice the {>riginal carrier
frequently aj^. Both of these terms are apparent in the spectium shown in Figure 86(1:). Applying tiie lowpass filcer to H(r) corresponds tt) retaining the first term on the nght-hand side of eq. <8J3) ;ind eliminating the second term.
The overall system for amplitude modulation and demodulation using a compiex exponential carrier is depicted in Figure 8r7£ and the overall system for m<)dul^t]4.>n and
demodulation using a sinusoidal tairier is depicted in Figure 8.8, In these figures^ we have indicated the n;ote general caye in which, for both the compkx exponential and the
sinusoidal earner, a carrier phase tf^ is included. The modification of the preceding analysis so as to include 6^ is straightforward and is considered in Problem 8.21

x(l).

Sec 8.2

Demodulation for Sinu&^idal AM

.0.

^ y(t;

gifiLict I U:,i

Wt)

<H>

y{f'

cos HU(.t + 0^ >
(al

589

y(th

'(S>

*- w(t)

*- ¨(t}

t> llu^l + Ivl
(b)
Figure S.7 System for amplh tude modulation and democulatior usifig a complex exponentiai carrier (a) modulation: (b) denoduia'
titjn.

cos + (u>c.t a^

Lowpass filter
m

Figure B.B Amplitude modulation and demodulation with a sinusoidal car-

rer; |a) modulation system, (b) demodulation system. The lowpass riU$r cut-

w^ off frequency

is greater than miu and less tnan 2^*^ w^f

In the systeins of Figures S.7 and 8 8, the demodulating signal is iissumed to be synchronized \a phase with the modulanng signal, and consequently the process is referred to as iynchronous di'modulatioti. Suppose, however, that the modulator and demodulator are not synchroni^ied in phase. For the case of the complex exponential earner, with 0^ denoting the phase of the modulating carrier and 0^. ihe phase of the demodulating carrier,

and consequently.

(S.14) (8.15)

IS.16)
Thus, if &i 7^ 0,., Mr) will have a complex amplitude factor. For the particular case in which x(r) is positive, x(t) ^ \w{t)1 and thus x(t) cat\ be recovered by taking the magnitude of the demodulated signal.
For the sjnusoidal carrier, again let 6,. and 0, denote the phases of the modulating and demodulating carriers, respectively, as indicated in Figure 8,9. The input to ihe lowpass
filter is now

or, using the trigonometric identity

^an-)

J + - + cosifti + er)cos{iii,t = tif,) ^cos(e,

0,-)

+ - cos(2i^, / -f ^,.

<i£, ),

(8. IS)

590

Gommunication Systems

Chap. 8

xO)

0

*- y(()

J.

% cos {<i>ct *-

)

*- cos{S,,-4c)Mt)

CCS [tii^t - i^c )
ib)
Figure a.9 Sinusoidal ampiilucjfl modulation and demoijuiatlon system Tor which the carrier signals and the modulator and demodulator are not ^^nctiro-
nized (a) nnodjiator: (b) demodulator.

we have

w(t) = - t;os(er - <^t'U(f) + ^x{t)c<i^\2a}^t + 6^^ fpr\

(8,19)

and the output of the hiwpass filter is then x{i) multiplied by the amplitude factor cos(Sc <^t ). If the oscillators in the modulator and demodulator are in phase, d. = <p^^ and the output of the lowpass filler is x{t). O^ the other hand, if the^e oscillators have a phase difference of 17/2, the output will be zero. In generaJ, for a maximum output f^hignaL the oscillators should be in phase. Of even more importance, the phase relation between the two oscillators must be maintained over time, so that the amplitude factor cos(f^t ~ <^r) does
not vary. This requires careful synchronization between the ntiodulator and the demodulator, which is often diftioulu particularly when they are geographically separated, as is
typica! in a communication system. TTie corresponding effects of, and the need for, syn-
chronization not onl> between the phase of the modulator and demodulator, but between
the frequencies of the carrier signals used in both, are eitplored in detail in Problem 3.23.

B,2.2 Asynchronous i:>emoduJation
In many systems that employ sinusoidal amplitude modulation, an alternative demodulation piocedure referred to as ojiynchronous demodulation is cotnmonly used. Asyn-
chronous demodulation avoids the need for synchronization between the modulator and demodulator. In paiticular, suppose that jr(i) is always positive and that the carrier fre-
quency Wf is much higher than ta^^ the highest frequency in the modulating signal.
The motiulated signal y({] will then have the general form illustrated in Fignre 8.10,

--

Sea B.2

Demodulation for StnusoJdal AM

591

-- In particular, the envelope of y{t) that is, a smooth curve connecting the peaks in v(f>

would appear to be a rea'ionable approximation to j(f l Thus, jr(r) couid be approximately

recovered thiough the use of a systetu that tracks these peaks to extract ihe envelope. Such
a system is refeired to z$ an envelope detector. One example of :i simple circuit that acts

a> an envelope detector is shoi^Ti in Figure K. Ufa). This circuit is generally followed by a

lowpass filter to reduce the variations at the canier frequency^ which iire evident in Figure

8 1 1(b) and which will generally be present In the output i^i an envelope detecwi tif the

type indicated in Figure R-U(a)-

The two ba-iic assumptions required for asynctu^>nous demodulation are thai x.{i^

be positive and that x{t) vary slowly compared to oin sw that the envelope is* easijy tracked. Th? second condition is s^tls^ed, for example, in audio transmission [jver a radio-

frequency (RF) channel, where the highest frequency present in .v<0 is typically 15 to 20

MHz kHz and Èj,/2'jr is in the range 500 kHz to 2

The first condition^ that Jf(;i be positive,

can be satisfied by simply adding an appmpriate constant value to x{t) or, equiv^iently,

by a simple change in the modulator, as shown in Figure 8. 1 2. The output of The envelope
detector then approximates x{t) + A, from which xi}) is ea!=ily obtained.

To use the envelope detector for demcdulation, we require that A be sufficiently

K lat^e so thai x{t) + A is posidve. Let denote the maximum amplitude of A(f); that is,

A> |j^f)| ^ K. For x{t)+A to be positive, we require that

K. The ratio A'M is commonly

referred to as the modulaUon ir\ilex m. Expressed in percent, it is referred to as the^fjr**/ir
modulation. An illustration of the output of the modiilator of Figure 8T2 for x{t) sinu-
m m soidal and foi =^0.5 (50% modulation) and = 1.0 (1CX)% modulation), is shown in

Figure S. 13.

In Figure 8.14, we show a comparison of the spectra as ^oci^ted w ith the modulated
signal when synchronous demodulation ;ind when asynchronous demodulation are used
We note Ln particular that the output of the modulati^r f^r the asynchronous system iri A Figiue 8.12 has an additional component cos tu^fthaL is neither present nor necessary in

the synchronous system. This is represented in the spectrum cf Figure 8.1 4(c) by the pres-

K ence

of

impulses

at

+i*j^

and

-^^ .

For

a

fixed

maximum

amplittide

of the modulating

A h signal, as

decreased the relative amount of carrier present iu the modulated output

decreases. Since the carrier component in the output contains no information^ its presence

Envelope

Figure 8.10 Amplitude -modulated signal for which the madjiatmg signal
Is posltrve. The dashed cutve repr¨sCTits the eny&lope of the modulated
signal.

592

-- :

+ -w

v(t)

CI z

-
1

(at

Communication Systems

Chap. S

+

H

wtt)

¨(t)-

figure 8- 1 1 Demodulation b^' envelope detection {a) cin^uit for envelope detection usir>g half-wave rectification; (b) waveforms associated with ttie en-
m velope detector {i): r{t) Is tne ^alf-wave rectified sipnal, x{t) is ttie true
envelope, and w{t) is the envelope obtained from the circuit In (a). The rela-
tionsfiip t>etween x{t) ajnd w{t) tias been fljoggerated in [b} for purposes of illustration. In a practical asynchronous demoduiation system, w{t) would typi-
cally be a much closer approxinriation to x{t) than depicted tiere.

(?)

^(i)

^ y(t)=(A+x(l)>oo3cD^t

cos fjtA

Frgure fi. 1 2 Moduiator lOr an asynchronous modulation-demodulation
system.

-- represents an inefficiency for example, in the amount of power required to transmit

-- the modulated signal and thus, in one sense it is desirable to mate the ratio /l/A--i,e,.

m-- the modulation index

as large as possible. On the other hand, the ability of a simple

envelope detector such as diat in Figure 8.11 to follow the envelope and thus extract x(0

improves as the modulation indes decreases. Hence, there is a trade-off between the effi-

Sec 8.2

AM Dflmoduiation fcr Sinusoidal

(a)

593

Figure 8, T3 OjtpuT of iHe am-

plitude modulation system cf Figure

m B,12: (a) moculatior index

= 3.5;

m

m (b) modulation index - 1.C

t*>M (a)
w.
{b)
K>

Figure fi. 1 4 Comparison of spec-
tra for synchcDnoLis and asynchronous smusoidaj amiilitude modulation systems: (a) spectrum of fiiodjlating Eignaf; (b) spectrum of >f(^)cos*j>^/ representing madutafed sigr^al in a ^ncUrcnous system' (c) s^ectTum of (^(0 ^^]c0Sjj>t' representing modu-
m lated signal an asynchronous
system.

594

Communication Systems

Chap. B

ciency of the system in terras of the po^ver in the output of the modulator and the quality

of the demodulated signnl. Theni are a number of advantages and disadvantages to the asynchronous modulation-
demodulation system of Figures 8Jl and 8J2, compared with the synchronous system of Figure 8.8, The synchronousi system requires a more sophisticated demodulator because the oscillator in the demodulator must be synchronized with the oscillator in the modu-
m lntoT, b<nh in phase and in frequency. On the othei hand, the asynchronous modulator

general requires transmitting more power than the synchronous modulator, since, for the

envelope detector to operate properly, the envelope must be positive, or equivalenily. there

must be a carrier component present in the tiansmitted signal. This is often preferable in

cases such as that asi^ociated with public radio broadcasting, in which it is deiirable to

mass- prod ace large numbers of receivers (demodulators) at moderate tost. The additional

On cost in transmitted power is then offset by the savings in cost for the receiver.

the

t>ther hand, in situations in which transmitter power requirements are at a premium, as

in satellite communication, the cost of implementing a more .'>ophisticated synchronous

receiver is warranted.

8.2 FREQUENCYDIVISIQN MULTIPLEXING
Many systems used for transmitting signals provide more bandwidth than is required for any one signal. For exaoiple, a typical micmwave link ha^^ a total bandwidth of several
gigahertz, which is considerably greater than the bandwidth required for one voice chan[jel. If the individual voice signals, which are overlapping in frequency^ have their frequency content shifted hy means of sinusoidal amplitude modulation so that the spectra of the modulated signals no longer overlap, they can be transmitted simultaneously over a single ^videband channci. The resulting concept is referred to ^^frequency-division multiplexing (FDM>, Frequency nil vision multiplexing using a sinusoidal carrier is illustrated in Figtire 8.15. Th& individual signals to be transmitted are assumed to be band limited and
COSCl>nt

^wHi
Figure B. 1 5 Frequency-diviston
multiplexing ustng sinusoidal amplitude modulation.

--

Sec. 8.3

Freqjency-Oivision Multiplexing

595

are modulated with different earner frequencies. The m:)duJaied signals Ère then summed
and transmitted siniultanetusiy ovcrthe same communicauoin channeK The spectra of the individual suiichanneU and the composite multiplexed signal iire itlustrated in Figure ^16. Through this multipliixing process, the individual input signals arc allocated distinct seg-
nvents of the fvequcncy band. Tt> recover tbe Individual channels in the demultiplexing process requires two basicstcps: bandpass filtering lo extract the nioduiated signal c^rrespoiidmg to a specific channel, followed by demodulation to recover the original signaL Thi^ is iUustrated in Figure ti.17 lo lecovevcharinel a, where, for. purposes ^f iUustration. synclironuus demodulation is assumed.

XJ^w>
&i
^M *^M ^

\{Ho)

(h

-- (Um

i^M

^^

V. ((<.>}

\{M
A
W|w *^M

_.j:^ Ci

%{m)

n

Ci

A -i^r

V. (;<.>}

A

/\-- l-- 111 J_J i-J i.._J__i^J I

1

fl-- ---- /\ -- L_j LJ I l__Z

\

I

figure a. 16 Specira associated
with the fi-equei^cy division nultiplexnij^

ñ^^

'"^

""^a

"^

^t

'^^ ^ system cf Bgure ai5

59b
-Demulliplt;*irtgfdt&r

CO^tiKt

Communicali on Systems

Chap 3

-L>emOdulation-
LOW pass
filler

*- ^^(tJ

Figure 3.17 DemulttplGXEng and denodula.ion for a frecuency-drvision mLiltiple>;ed

Telephone communicalion is one i mport ant appJ icati on of frequency-division multi-

RF plexing. Another is rhc transmits I oti of signals through the armospherc in rhc

band.

In the United States, the use of rddio frequencies for tran-smitting signiils over the range
JO kHz to 275 GHz is controlled hy the Federal Communications Coinniisjjion, and

different portions of the range are allocated for different purposes. The current allo-

cation ot frequencies is shown in Figure 8.18. As indicated, the frequency range in

MHz AM AM the neighborhotjd of I

is asisigned to the

broadcast band, where

refers

AM specificaily to the use of sjtiu^oidal amphtude modulation. Individual

radic sta-

AM tions are assigned specifit; frequencies within the

band, and thus, nnany statLons

can broadcast simultaneously through this use of frequency-divjsion multiplexirg. In

principle, at the receiver, an individual radio station can be selected by dcmultiplcx-
mg and demodulating* as illuscratt:d in Figure 8.17. The tuning dial on the receiver
would then conmd both the ceriier frequency of the bandpass filler and ihe frequency of

the demodulating oscillator. In fact, for public broadcasting, ajiynchronous modulation

and demodulation are used to simplify the receiver and reduce its co^t Furthermore,

the demultipleAing in Figure 8.17 requires a sharp cutoff bandpass filter with variable

center frequency. Variable frequenc) -selective filters are difficult to implement, and

consequently, -j, fixed tiller is implemented instead, ar^d an intermediate stage t>f mod-

ulation and filtering [referred to in a radio receiver as the intermediate -freqaencx (IF)

stage] is u'ied. The 'js^ of modulation to slide the spectrum of the signal past a fixed

bjinclpass hiter replaces the use of a variable bardpass filter in a manner similar to the

procedure discussed in Section 4.5.1. This basic procedure is inci?rpti rated into typical

AM home

cadirh retreivens. Some of tbe more detailed issues involved are considered in

Problem 8.36.

As illu.strated in Figure K 16, in the frequent y-di virion multiplexing .system of fig-

ure 8.15 the spet;trum of each individual signal is replicated at both positive and negative

frequencies, and thus the modulated signal occupies twice the bandwidth of thi^ <>riginal.

This represents an ii^etficietit use of bandwidth In the next i^ection we c^msider an al-

ternative form of sinusoidal amplitude modulation, which leads in mere efficient use of

bandwidth at the cost of a more complicated modulation system.

Sbe;. 5.4

Single-Sidebaod Sinusoidal Amplitude Modulation

5^7

Frequeocy range

I>esiguRti4HI

T>plkAln9C3

PrvpngRlion DHtfaod

£-*l/j He fl3-.UHE

ELF
fentrtinely low fre^juent:^)
VF

M-acnwave, subniaHne l-uiti-
munic-atioti
Dala lemiinal-f, telephony

Mcsainctnir waves
Cojjper wire

V.in kH7 SO 300 kll^
o^-^ MHz
3^:iOMHr
30-300 MH? 3-3 GH7
3- 30 OHl
y.i-:M)0<jHz
in^-10-OHz

VLF
(very ]cw frf-
quenir> j
LF
(low rrcquency)
MF
Cntediui^ frequency)
HF
(hL^ frrt|uciicy)
VHF
(very high fTequentyt
LHF
(uktra h]|h frequency)
SHP
("iupc' hi^h ficqucncy)
EHF
fexIrcFTKly Jllgtl fn^LiLicikcy) [itfrdrEJ, risittlc light, U Ira.vi4i|ct
1

NaviEatLon. telephone, ickc-

gr^ph, treqMency anti timing

$tai>danjs
[ndu^al (power iLnit) tom-

niLinLcatioi], aeronautical

dfttl maritime (on^-range

n^'TL^Lun, rwlki beacons-

AM MobLit,

bffTMidra^lingn

amaieur, pibhc sgjety

MilLtuy ci>Rt[iiLtnii;ariL>ji, jissa-

nautical mobile, inicnia'

tioeal tixai, amateur and

citizen 'ii band, indu^lrial

FM TV and

bruulc^-tl, land

iraosponutiuFi (taKis. buses

railroad^
UHF TV, SfJaL-e LelcTTKtry,
rjilar, mihuiy

SartcHire -and ifHiL-c Luininvnicition, c¨nitnun L^rricr
fCC). micrawave
Ex.pcnincrtal. ,gav¨ninicnl, ridi.] aiitrcinamy

Optic jl a>rn mu mcatitrii

Surface ducting (ground wave)
H4>^ly Hirfacc ducting
Du::tin^ S.nd iijiNsphccic
xf\sci\iia (^ty wavcl LonofiptKric: reflecting shy
wivc, 50-400 km layer
iilliliiHrh
Skv w^ve 1 iQiKHiplKnt and unpiMplnrnc KaKer)
Tifto'^hMiri^.nn tr^jpoiptienc vaiicr jjni linC'Uf^sLehit nelayin^
Line-of-sijihit iqroHpiKrc peiKlr^ijn
Line of SL|^[
Line ot sjgKl

CbAitncJ Features
PencCialion of c[>rulucttiig eanh twi Kawaier

Lour atlenuatir>D, httle fadings CHtrenely irfaUe phase and frequency, lai^c umeoirLaj;
Slight t'adjng, h^h aimf-
^phcri; pulse

[iKrrE&hcd fading, tut reliable

^d LntcrtnLtlcnt

frequej^Ly-

Kf^lr^ti^^ fading. rrtuLtipalh

F^ng, ^artcnng, and ntulu-
p&(h

Ijciu^phenc penetration. c*trat¨i-e^lnal noise. high directly
Water Viipur und ñ^\ ygcn
abiWrpli4jn

Figure 8.18 Allocation <rf frfrquBncifls in the RF S pectrun).

S,4 SJISTGLE-SIOEBAND SfNUSOIDAL AMPLITUDE MODULATION

For the sinusoidal ampiitude modulation systems discussetj in Section 8:1, the lotaJ

bandwidth of the originai signal x\t) ist 2^^^, including both positive and negative

wm frequencies, where

ls the highest frequency present in x(t). With the use of a

complex exporbential carrier, the spectrum is translated to w^, and the total width of

the frequency band over which there is energy from the signal is still 2*^,*,, although die

modulated siignal is now compJes. With a sinusoidal carrier, on the other hand, the spec-

trum of ihe signal is shifted to +&i^ anti -w^, and thus, twice the bandwidth is required.

This suggests diat there is a basic redundancy in the modulated signal A^ith a sinusoidal

cairier. Using a technique referred to as singie-sideband maduUition. we can remove the

redundancy.

The spectrum of xit) is illustrated in Figure 8.19(a). in which we have shaded the
positive and negative frequency c:omponents differently to distinguish them. The spectrum

598

CammunicatioFi Sy&tems

Chap. 6

in Figure B. 19{b) results fnim modulation with a sinusoidal carrier where we identify an

upper ajid lawer sideband for the poKion of the spectrum centered at +ui( and that centered

at

-oi( Comparing Figures .

8.19(a.) and (b], we

see that X(j(if) can be recovered if only

the uppor sidebands at positive and negative frequencies are retained, or alternatively, if

only the lower sidehcinds at positive and negative frequencies are teiained. The resulting

spoctrum if only the upper sidebiindN are retained is shown in Figure S.l'3(c:). and the

resulting spectrum if only the lower sidebands are retained is shown in Figure 8.19(d).

The conversion of ji{T) to the form corresponding to Figure 8,1 9(c) or (d) is referred to as

single -sidehand moduiution (SSB), incotiirasi ui ihe double -sideband modulaiion (1>SB)

of Figure 8. 1 ^{h\ in which both sidebands arc retained

There are several mediods by which the single-sideband signal can be obtained. One is iiJ apply a shaq> cutoff bandpai^L^ or highp^iss tiltcr to the d<.iub1e- sideband signaJ of

Figure 8.19(b), as illustrated in Figure 8.20, to remove the unwanted sideband. Another

is to use a procedure diat jtilize\ pha?e shifting, Figiu^ 8.21 depicts a system designed

(a)

Upper I Lower I

fbl Y,,{J^>}

Lower \ Upper

Vr[N) (d)

Figure 8. 1 9 Double- anct s^nglt-
wideband modulation: (a) spectrum of rnadulatjng signal (b) spectrum after modulation with a sinusoidai carrier; (c) spectrum with oniy the upper sidebands, (d) spec:trurn with onJy the icTkVQr sidebands.

S¨c a. 4

5ingle-5idebar>d Sinusokjal Amplitude Modulation

V,(t)

Y{;.

599

1-'

^u(H

Figure 8.20 Sy&tem for retaining
the upper sidebands using id^l higjipass filtering.

to retaiTi the lower sidebands. The system M{j(o} in the figure is referred to as a "90* phase-shift network/* for which the frequency response is of the form

H(/w) = -J, w >
J-

<8.20>

= TKe spectra of j:{fX yi(0 = jrCOcostt^ff, y2(r)

x^it) sin ta^t, and ^(0 are illustrated in

Figure S.22. As is exanuifed in FYoblem 8.28. to retain the upper sidebands instead of the

lower sidebands, the phase characteristic of H{ja)) is reversed &o that

(8.21)
As i& explored in Problem B-29, s>TtchT0rti3us demo<]iulation of single- sideband syjiten^s can
be accornpli&hed in a maimer identicaJ to j^yuchrvnous demodulation of double-sideband systems. The price paid for the increased efficiency of single-sideband systems is added complexity in the modulator

600

m Co n u n pcation Systems

Chap .

fi

CCVS irtt-^

yi(T}
--ñ- y.i)

v.(t) sirno^t
< H^it^)
1

Figure 3.21 S^tem for sm^lesideband amplitude mcdulatiofi, using a 9C^
phas3-shift networVH iri vftiich only the lower sidebands ai& retifned.
In sumnnary, in Sections 3.1 through 8.4 we have seen a number of variations of complex exponential and sinusoidal ampliiude modulation. With asynchronous demod-
ulation, discussed in Secllon 8 2.2, a constant rnust be added to the nnodulating signal so that il is positive This re&ulLs in ttie presenc^e of the carrier signal as a component in the modulated output, requiring more power for transmission, but resultiiiE in a simpler deniedulatoT than is required in a synchronous system. Alternatively, cnly the upper or
lower ijidcbands in the modulated output may be retained, which makes more efficient use
of bandwidth and transtnkter power, but requires a more sophisticated modulator. Sinu!;i>idiil arriplitude modulation with both sidebands and the presence of a t:4irTieris typically
abbreviated as AM-DSBAVC (amplitude modulation, double sideband/with carrier) and,
when the carrier is suppressed or absent, as AM-DSB/SC (amplitude modulation, double-
sLdeband/suppressed carrier). The coirehponding single-sideband systems are iLbbreviated
AM-SSBAVC and AM^SSB/SC.
Sections 8.1 through K.4 aie intended to provide an Introduction to many of the basic concepts associate with ^intjsoidal amplitude rnodulation- There are many variations in
details and implementation, and the reader is referred to the bibliography for an indication of the numerous excellent books that explore this topic further

Sec 3-5

Amplitude Modul^tioii vti\U a Pulse- Tram Cimer

)
60T

"^^AH

Y{\^}
[\

Figure B.22 Spettrci associated
with ttie single -sideband system of
Figure %2\

S.S AMPLITUDE MODULATION \UTTH A PULSE-TRAIN CARRJEf?

8.5.1 ModuPation of fr Pube-Train Carrier

In previous secnions, we examined amfiJitud^ modulation witha sinusoida] carrier AnDther important class oT liinplitude modulation techniques eorrej^ppnds to the use of a carrier
signal thai is a puise train, as illustrated in Figure S.23: amplitude modulaiion of this type
effectively corresponds to trarsinitting eqiidly spaced time slices of j:(/i. In general we wOM\d j\i}\ expect that ati aibitrary signal could be recovered fn>m such ii set of tune slices.
However, otir cxaminatioTi fjf the concept of sampJing in Chapter 7 suggest* that Ihis should be pussible if .xir) is band limited and the pulse repetition frequency is high enough.
From Figure 8.2,1^

yit) = xiOcity,

fi^.22)

Wi .e 1

. .

di e

modul aLed

si gnal

yU )

is

tlie

prod uct

of

a(

an d the carrier cit ) .

jm I h K{ J (it l X{

,

and (.'{joj) representing the ^ou^ie^ transforms of each of these signals, it follows from

602

C(^J

>.\i)

O

v(t)

Connmunicalion Systems

Chap. 8

A
c(t)

y(n
&

IN

rl
^

Figure 8.23 Amplitude modulaticn
0- a pulse trair

the multiplication property that
-- n;tr>) - xoj+c:(jw).

tfi23£

Since c{t) is periodic with period T, C{ja)) t^onsists of impuL'ies in frequency spaced by
lir/T; thai is,

^ - C(jciJ)

2Tr

- fJifi(ai Atu^^X

jL--.

(S.241

where iu^ -- 27r/r and the coefficients h^ are the Fi>urier sede'i cf>efficients ofvU). which, from Example 3.5, are

at -
irk

(S.25)

S¨c. 6.5

Amplitude Modulation With a Pulse Train-Carrier

603

The spec;trum of r(r) h shown in Figure &,24(b). With the spectrum of x{f) as illustrated
in Figure 8.24Ca), the resulting spectrum of the mcKiulated signal v(/) is shown in Figure S,24(c^ From eqs. (8.23) and <S.24), Yiju)) is a sum of scaled and shifted rep]it:a% oi

^ y(jo>) =

a^^Xijitj - U,)).

A = -^

^S.26j

(a)
2iri'T

1

T

{t>>

Y(j^}

J "-Jo. -til

V

"^:i^

^t

-f'>M Wy

V ^^^

Figure 8,24 Spectra associated with amplitjde modulation of a pjise train
(a) spectrum trf a t>andlimited -signal x{ty, (b) spectrum of th* puis& carn$r signal cU) in Rgure B.23; (c} spectrum of the modulated puls¨ trail y{t).

604

CommjnicatJonS /Stems Chap &

Comparing cq. (8.26) with eq. (7.6) and Figure 3.24 with Figure 73ic], wc see thyt the spectrum of y(.t^ ts very similar m fortn to the spectrum resulting from sampling with

aperiodic itnpulse train, the cnJy difference being the values ot the Fourier ooetJicients

of the pulse train. For the pericdic impuiie tr^iti used in Chapter 7. all of the Courier

coefficients are equal to \fT in value, while for the pulse train c{t) in higure 8.^3, the

pLiurier coefftL-ientsi are given by eq. (8.25^ Ctji;^<^uentW, the repUcas i>f 'Xijtyi) do ncl
> overlap as long as Wt ^w^y, which correspotids to the condition of the Nyquist siimpling h theorem. Jf this constraint satisfieJ* therit as with impulse-train sampling. ,x(r) can be

recovered frotn y{t) through the use of a bwpass filler \^ith cutoff frequency greater than
-- iiii^ and less than ot^ ofM-

NtJte that the same conclusion holds for a wide variety of other pulseJike carrier

wavefortns: Jf di) ii any periodic signat with Fourier tran^forni as i]i eq. (8-24) ft^r some

set of Fouriei coefiicients ci^, then Yijoi) is given by eq. (S.26). Tben^ as Iflng as m, ^

2W7' > 2w*w,lhc replicas of ^(yw> do not overlap, allowing ustorecover jr(/)b>' Jowpass

filtering, provided thai the DC Fourier coefficient ^o is ncnzdo. As shown in Problem

8.11, if ao is Èero or unacceptably small, then, by using a b^ndpassn filter tc> select one of

AM the siiifled repHcas of X(^tu) with a larger value of a^, we obtain a smusoitial

signal

with a scaled version of xit) as the modulating signal. Using the derrnnJulation methods
described in Section 8.2, we can then recover x{t).

8,5.2 Time-Dtvlsion Multiplexing
Amplitude modulation with a pulse-train carrier is often used to transmit several signals
over a single channel. As indicated in Figure 8. 23, the modulated output signal v<fl is nonzcn^ only when the carrier signal c(l) is on fie., is nonzero). During the intervals in
wMch c(0 is off, other similarly modulated signals can be transmitted. TWo cquivalcnl
repieKentatioiis of this process are ahtjwn in Figure S.25. In this technique for transmitting several signals over a single channel, each signal is in effecl assigned a set of time slijts
A of duration that repeat every T seconds and that do not overlap with the slots assigned
to other signals. The Einaller the ratio A/7, the liirger the number of signals that t:in be
transmitted over the channel. This procedure is referred to as time-diviiion multiplexing
(TDM). Whereas; trequencyKiiviMon multiplexing, as discussed in Section 8.3, assigns
diff&TsnxJrequency intervals to individual signals, timeKiivision multiplexing assigns different fime intervals to individual signals. Demultiplexmg the individual signals from the composite signal in Figure 8. 25 is aceomphshed by time gating, to select the particular time slots ass[>ciated with each individual signal.

8.6 PUISE^AMFLITUDE MODULATION
8.6.1 Puise^mplrtude Mt^dul^ted Signals
In Section S.5 we described a modulation system in which a continuous- time signal x{f)
modulates a pcrifidit pulse train, coTresponding to transmitting time slices of ^(0 of dura-
tion Asecondscver> ^seconds. As we saw both in that discussion and inourinvcstioation
of sampling in Chapter 7, our ability to receiver x\t) from these time slices depends not on their duration A, but rather on their frequency 277/7, which must exceed the Nyquist rate

Sec. fl.6

Pulse-Air^plitude Modulation

Xi^t)

^i^)
J^iOl

^ y{t)
taj

605

nnnn

xi[t)

SfT[t)

nnnn
X2<t)

ILJ1_[LJ1

Vtt)

J(3(t)

^I

nnnn

xj[0 {b)

Figure e.25 Time-division
multiplexirtg.

in order to en.sure an al!as-free reconstruction of x(t)r That is^ in principle, we need only
transmit the samples :>i{nT) jf the sigtiai x(_t). In fact, in tnodem communication systems, sampled vaiues of the informatifln-
beaiing sign^ x{t), rather than time slices are more typically trans nnitted. For practical
reasons, ther^e aie IJmLtatlons on the maximum ampHtude that can be transmLtted over
a connmxitiication channel, so that transmitting impulse- sampled versions of xU) is not practical. Instead* the samples xinT) arc used to modulate the amplitude of a MK|uence of
pulses, resulting in what is referred to a^ a puhe-ampUtude modulation (PAM) system.

6Q6

Cflmmunicatfon Systems

Chap B

m The use of rectangular pulses corresponds to a sample- nnd-hold strategy which

puUesofduracion i and amplitude proportional to ihe instantaneous sample values of .v(,'}

PAM are transmitted. The resulting waveform for a single

channel of this type is illus-

tiated in Figure 8,26. In the figure, the dotted curve represents the signal x(0. As with

PAM the tnodaiation scheme ia Section 8,5,

signals can be time muUipleKed.This iS illus-

trated in Figure S.27, which depicts the transmitted waveform with three time- multiplexed

channels. The pulses associated with each channel are distinguished by shading, as well

as by the channel number above each pul.^e- For ii given pulse-repetititjn period T, as the

pube >vidth decreases, more time-multiplexetl channels can be transmitted over the same

ccimmoTiiciitioEi t;hannel or medium. However^ ss the pulse width decreases, it is typically

necessary to increase the amplitude of the transmitted pulses, so that a reasonable amount

of energy is transmitted in each pulse.

In addition to energy considerations, a number of other issues must be addressed

PAM in designing a

signal In particulaj', as l&itg as the sampling frequency exceeds the

Nyquist rate^ we know that jr(r) can be reconstructed exactly from its samples, and cnn-

F ^ -^

^
/'
y
/ '
^^^

---

Hif-

^^-. ^
1

T- f

1

^

^ ^

^^ "* ,

^

"^
^^

i^lt)

Figure a.26 Transmitted wavefomi 1D< a single PWA chanivel. Th$ doited
curve represerrts the signal x{XY

Û
^^ T, I-

y(t)

Û

n 1^m I
M-^.'^

Û

mi

i ^-^ 4.

ˋÛ
-- t

-T/3
@

Û

4TV3

Û

F^^M^e e.27 Transmittecf waveform with three tine-mu)tipfexe;J PAM channels. The
pulses associated with each chaDnei are distinguished by shading;, a$ welE as by tha
channei niirr:ber above each pulse. Here, the imters^mbol spacing is h = Tf3.

Sw. 8.6

Puise-Ampfihide Modulation

607

sequently we can use these s^impks to niodulate the amplitude of a. sequence of pulses of any ihape. The choice of pulse shape is dictated by conaideraiions such ai the frequency selectivity of the communication medium being use<i and the problem of intersymbol inteiferencct which we discuss nest.

m d,6.2 Intersymbol Interference PAM Systems

TDM In the

pulse-amplitude tuodulation system just described, the receiver cart, in prin-

ciple, separate the channels by sampling the time- multiplexed wavefonn at appropriate

timeji. For exan^le, consider the lime-multiplexed ^igtiai in Figuie,8,27, which consists

of pulse-amplimde-nKKlulated versions of three signals X] (t), ^li^X and x:Ai)r If we sam-

ple yU) at appropriate limes, coire.'*ponding, for example, to the midpoints of each pulse,
we can separ^e the samples of the three signal^. Tliat is,

y{t) = Ax2itX
y(t) = AMt\

t = T^,T^ Ý}>T\.Ty Ý6T
t = iTuiTy Ý3ri.ri Ý er^

(8^27)

where T\ is the inten^ynibol spacing, here equal to T"/3, and where A is the appropriate

pmpoTtionaiity constant. Inother words, samples of ji:,(f), jf2(0- and xjCf) can be obtained

PAM by appropriate sampling of the received time-multiplexed

signal.

The strategy indicated in the preceding paragraph assumes that the traiiHmitted

pulses remain distinct as they propagate over the communication channel. In traxiNTnis-

sion through any realistic channel, however, the pulses can be expected to be distorted

through effects such as additive noise and filtering. Additive noise in the channel will,

of course, introduce ampliLude errors at the sampling times. Filtering due to the nonideal

frequency response of a channel causes a smearing of the individual pulses that can cause

the received puhes to overlap in rime. This interference is illustratttJ in Figure 8.28 and

is referred to as intersymbpl interference.

inleraymbqi interferervce

Sampling time for channel 1

Sampling tifne for charineF 3
Figure 8,28 Intersymbol fnterterence.

--

608

Communioatioa Systems Chap. 8

TKe smearing over time of the idealized poises in Figure 8.27 can result from the

bandwidth eonfitr^nt^ of the channel or from pdiase dispersion caused by nonconstant

group deiay, as was discussed in Section 6.2.2. (See in particular, Example 6,1.) If the

intersymbol interference is due only to the limited bandwidth of the channel, an approach

is to uac a pulse shape pie) that is itself band limited and therefore not affected (or only

minimally affected) by the restricted bandwidth of the channel, hi particular, if the chan-

h^ nel has a frequency respcinse H(jto) that

no distortion over a specified Frequency b^nd

= < W\ (e.g., if Hijitf)

I for |cu|

then if the pulse that is used is band limited (i.e., if

^ WX PAM P[jtii) - for |tu]

each

signal will be recei\ed without distortion. On the

other hand, by Hiding such a pplse, we no longer have pulses without overlap as in Fig-

ure 8.27, Nevertheless, intersymbol interference can be avoided in the time domain, even

with a band-limited pulse, if the pul^ shape is constmined to have zero-crossings at the

other sampling times [so that eq. (8.27) continues to hold]. For example, consider the sine

pul^ie

---- - = pU)

Ti sin(7rr/ri)

TTf

and its corresponding spectrum displayed in Figure 8.29. Since the pul^ is ecto al integer

multiples of the symbol spacing T'l , as indicated in Figure 8.30^ there will be no intersym

we = bol interference at these instants. That is, if

sample the received isignal at /

^7"i, then

the contributions to this sampled value from all of the other pulses, i.e., from p{t - mTi t

for mj^k, wiU be identically zero. Of course, uvoiding interference from adjacent symbols

F^une S.29 A sjno pulse and its corresponds r>g spectrum.

Sec.e.6

Pul$?-Amplitude Modulalion

PJse uSEd to transmit
sam-ple of channel 1

Pulss u$ed to transmit sampfe gf channel 2

60^

Pulse used to transmit sample of diannel 3

Sampli'>g lime fqr th>annel 1

Samalrng

me II

for

ch-annel 2

Sampling time for charx.el 3

Figure 8,30 Absence of intersymbol interterence when $rFic pulses with
correctly chosen zero-crossings $fs used.

requires high accuracy in the sampling times, so thiit sampling occurs at the zero-crossings of the adjaceni iymbols.
The sine pulse In only ojie of many band-limiced pulses with time-domair zerot;rossings at ztT,. Ý27], etc. More generally, consider a pulse p(t) with spectrum of the
form

1 +P|0)^

^ tli

:^

nj^) = I

^ ^ <^. Itli

(8.28)

0.

otherwise

and with Pdjat] having odd symmetry around ^/Ti , so that

IT
f'\\-J^+Jj-^\= -Pi J<0^-J^^

^ I^ W ^

(8.29)

= as iUustrated in Figure S.3 1. If P^{}(l})

0, p{t) is the sine pulse itself. More generally,

as explored in Problem 8.42, for any Pijt^) satisfying the conditi^jns in eqs. (S 28) and

tT^ (8,29), pit) will have ?'ero-crossirig at

Ý27 j,

While signals satisfying eqs. (8.28) and (8.29) allow un to overcome the problem

of limited channel bandwidth, other channel distortions may occur that require a differ-

ent diotce of pulse wavefomi or some additional processing of the received signal prior

TDM to the separation of the different

signals. In particular, if |//(jtu)| is not constant

-- over the passband, there may be a need to perform cfiannel eijualizaiion i.e., filtering of

6fO

P{jt^)

Commjn cation Systems

Chap. B

}^

^^ 1 + P1[IW)

v^ \

Pt{j<^)

WT Figure fi.3] Odd symmetry around

as defined in aq. (829).

the received signal to correct for the nonconstant channel gain. Also, if the channel has nptiltneiv pha^e, distortion can result that leads to inter&ynibol interference, unless compensating signal processing is performed Problems 8.43 and 8.44 provide illustrittioD.'; of these effects.

8.&3 Digital Pulse'Amplitude and Pulse-Code Modulation

PAM The

system described in The preceding suhaections involves the use of a diincrete set

of samples to modulate a sequence of pulses. Hiis set of samples can be thought ot as a

discrete-time signal -v[n], and in inany applications j;[¨l is in fact stored in or generated b>' a digital system, in such cases, the limited word length of a digital system implies that j:[^J Ciin take on only a finite, quantized set of values, resulting in only a finite set of possible

amplitudes for the modulated pulses.

PAM In fact, in many cases this quantized form of digital

is reduced to a system

-- -- using only a tew typically^ only two amplitude values. In particula^r, if each sample of

i[n} is represented as a binary number (i.e.. a finite string of O's and 1 \X then a pulse

with one of two possible values (one value corresponding to a and one value to a I ) can

be set for each binary digit, orbit in the string. More generally, in ordetto protect a^ainsl

tr^smission errors or provide secure communication, the sequence of binary digits rep-

resenting x[n] might first be transformed or encoded into another sequence of O's and i s
before transmission. For example, a very simple error detection mechamsm is tti transmit

one additional modulated pulse for each sample of x[nU representing a /'t:fWl> check. That

is, this additional bit would be set to I if the binary represetitation of x[ji\ has an odd number of Ts in it and to if there is an even number of 1 's. The receiver can dien che^^k the

received parity bit iigainst the other received bits in order to detect inconsistencies. Mortf

complex coding and error correction schemes can certainly be employed, and the design

of codes with particular desirable properties is an important component of communication

PAM system design. For obvious reasons, a

system modulated by an encoded sequence of

O's and I 's is referral to as a. pulse-code modulation (PCM) .^iystem.

T)

S^G.fiJ

Siniisojdaf Frepu^ficy Modulation

61

8.7 SINUSOIDAL FREQUENCY MODULATION

In the preceding sections, we discussed a immber of specific amplitude Tnodulation sys-

tcma in whicb the modulating signal was used \o vary the amplitude of a sinusoidal or

a pulse carrier. As we hiive seen, i^uch ^y^stems are amenable tv detailed analysis using

tbt frequency-domain techniques we developed in preceding chapters In another very

important class of modulation techniques referred to ss frequency modulation {FM}, the

modulating signal is u$edto control the frequency of a sinusoidal carrier. Modulation sys-

teins of this tjpe have a number of advantages over amphtude tnodulatioti systems. As

suggested by Figure 8.10, with sinusoidal amplitude modulation the peak amplitude of

-- the envelope of the carrief is directly dependent on the amplitude of the modulating signal
xit)^ which can have a large dynamic range i.e,, can vary significantly. With frequency

FM modulation, the envelope of the carrier is constant. Consequently, an

transmitter can

FM always operate at peak power. In addition, in

systems, amplitude variations introduced

over a transmission channel due to additive disturbances or fading can^ to a large extent,

be eliminated at the receiver. For this reai^on. in public broadcasting and a. variety of other

FM AM contexts^

reception is typically belter than

reception. On the other hand, as we

will see, frequency modulation generally requires greater bandwidth than does sinusoid:d

amplitude modulation.

Frequency modulatimi systems are highly nonlinear and, Cftuseqtseittly, are not as

straightforward to anaJyze as are the amplitude modulation systems dii^cussed in the pre
ceding sections. However, the methods we have developed in earlier chapters do allow us

tu gain some understanding of the nature and operation of these systems.
We begin by introducing the general notion of dn^^e modulanon. Consider a sinu-

soidal carrier expressed in the form

cU) = Af:oiiia^t + 0,) = Acos9{n,

(8.30)

where ^(f) = w.r H- 6^ andwheretij^ is the frequency andfl^ the phase of ^e carrier. Angle
moduiatiiju, in general, corresponds to using the modulating signal to change or vary the
angle 6(i). One form that this somedmes takes is to use the modulating signal xU) to vary
the phase Oi so that the modulated signal takes the form

yif) = A coslwj t + d, (01 where 0^ is now a function of time, specifically of the form
^M = ^0 + k^xQl

J (3 1
(S32)

If 7{t) is, for example, constant, the phase of ^(f) will be constant and proportional to the amplitude of ;r(;). Angle modulation of the form of eq. (8.31) is referred to ^^ phase modulcitUm. Another form of angle modulation corresponds to varying the derivative of the angle proponionally wilh the modulating signal; dtat is,

= >0) >lcos(3(r).

(S.33)

where

dmA
--yr-

= w,

+

kfX(t).

(g.34)

612

Communication Systems

Chap, ft

For x(t) consianij v{0 is sinusoidal with a frequency tha: is offsec from the carrier frequency ii>, by an amount prtiponionai to th<i amplitude of x(t). For that reason, angk
triodulation of the form of eqs. (8.33) and (H.34) is commonly referred to ^& frei^uency
modularion. Although phase inodulation and frequency modulation are different forms t)f angle
modulation, they can be easily related. From eqs. (831) and(S.32)£ for phase modulation.

d6(0

^ , dMO

(8.35}

Figure fi.32 m Phase modulatio/i, fret^tiency emulation, aid their relationship (a)
p^ase [TiDdiifatiOn wth a ramp as the madLlatJig signal; (b) frefjuency madulation with a ramp as the modulating signal; (c) frequen<;v modulation with a step [the deri^ratrve of a ramp) as the modulating signal.

3

Sac. 0.7

Sinu&oidaj Frequency Modulation

61

and rhus, compflring eqs. (8.34) and (8.35), we see that phase modulating wiih xU) is iden-

tical to frequency modulating with the derivative of x{t). Likewise, frequency modulating

MO with

ii identical to phase modulating with the integral of x{t). An illuitration of phase

modulation and frequency modulation is shown in Figures 8.32(a) and (b). It^ both cases,
the modulating itignal is M.t) = tuit} (i.e., a ramp signal increasing lineiirly with lime
> for i 0). In Figure R.?2<c>, an example of frequency modulation is shown with a <;tep
(thederivariveof a ramp) Eis the modulating signal [i.e., j:(/) ^ ¨(/)], The correspondence
between Figures S, 32(a) and (c) should be evident.

Frequency mydulation with a step cotrespon^is to the trequency of the sinuscjidal
carrier changing instantaneously from one value to another when j:(/) changes value at/ -- 0, much as the frequency of a siniisoidul oscillator changes when die frequency setting is
switched instamaneously. When the frequency modulation is a ramp^ as in Figure 8 32(b),

the frequency changes linearly with time. This notion of a time-varying frequency is often

bestexpres^d in terms of the concept of msjanJaneouifrequenryr For

y{i) -= Af:oiid{rX the instantaneous frequency of the sinusoid is defined as

(S.36)

Thus, for>'(0 truly sinusoidal [i.e., OiO = {ioj + <?o)]. the instantaneoui, frequency is w, , as we would expect. For phase modulation as expressed in eqs, (8,3l)and (K.32), the instantaneous frequency is io, + kp{dx{t)fdt\ and for frequency modulation as expressed in eqs. <S.33) and (8J4), the instantaneous frequency is w^ + kfxit).
Since frequency modulation and phase modulation are easily related^ we w^iN phrase
the icmaining ndiscussion in terms of frequency modulation alone. To gain some insight into how the spectrum of the frequency-modulated signal is affected by the moduiaiing signal xit\ it is useful to consider two cases in which die modulating signal is sufficiently
simple so that some of die esKcntial properties of frequency modulation become evident.

8. 7 J JNJarrowband Frequency Moduration
Consider the case of frequency modulation with
x{t) = Acosto^T.
From eqs. (8.34) and (8.37), the instantaneous frequency is
= i^jU) Kt, + kfAcostA),,,t.
which varies smusoidally between w^. + k/A and tit^ - k/A, V/ith Aw ^ k/A,
we have
= 1^,(0 ^li^ + AÈEJCOS^m^

(8.38) (8.39)

6f4
and

Communication Systems CKap.G

where d^y is a constant of integration. For convenience we will choose 6^ -- D, so that

= >'(0

t;os

i^A\\

The factor Aai/tiJ^T which we denote by m, is defined as the modulation index for

FM ftequenoy moduliitkiTi. The properties of

systems tend to be different, depending ofj

m m whether the modulation index is i^mall or large. The ca.se in which is sniall is referred

10 as fiiirn/wband FM. In genera], we can rewriie eq. (8.41) as

vU> ^ cos(ÈijJ + msiniu,^/)

(8.42)

or

v(0 - cosde),fcos(miinÈLj^r) -- siriM^f sin(m sintu^r)

(8.43)

When m is sufficiently small (-^ ^/2)h we can make the approximations
^ ciJs<m&irtWnrO K ^ sin<m sin WfflO ffisintUm^,

,8,44) vS.4!5)

so that eq, (ft.42) becomes

3^(0 == cosnitf - m(sinÈij,,,fKsinicj,f).

(S.46)

The spectrum of y(t) based on this ^>proxiniation is shown in Figure 8.33. We note

AM-DSB/WC that it has a similarity to

in that the earner frequency is present in the

spectmnii and there are sidebands representing the spectrutn of the modulating signal in
eq. (S.3H). However, in AM-DSB/WC the additional carrier injected is in phase w^th the
mtidulated carrier, whereas, as we see in eq, (8.46) for the case of the narrowband FM,

the carrier signal has a phase difference of ttII in relation to the amplitude-modulated

canier. The wavefonns corresponding to AM-DSB/WC and FM are also very different.

FM Figure 8,34(a) illustrates the narrowhand

waveform corresponding to eq. (8.46). For

companion. Figure S,34(h) shows the AM-DSB/WC signa]

>2(0 = cosftjf/ + nt(co&&)^0(cosftj,^).

(8-47)

FM For the narrowband

signal of eq. (8.46), the bandwidth of the sidebands isequ^il

to the bandwidth of the modulating signal, and in particular, although the approximation

in the equation is bas^d on assuming that m '^- ir/2, the band'width of the sidebands is

ytberwis>e independent of the modulation index n\ (i.e., it depends only on the bandwidth
A of the modulating signal, not on its ampiicude). similar stiitement applies fornarruwband FM with a more general modulating ^igtiai.

.

Sec e 7

Sinusoidal Frequency Modulation

Vfjai)

fivn "2
1
5

rr
2
1 T

615
Figure 0.33 ApproKJmate spectrufn
io( narrowband FM.

(^

Figure 8.34 CornparJson of narrdwband FM and AM-DSB/WG: (a) narfowband FM; (b) AM-DSB/V^C
B.7.2 Widet>and Frequency Modulation
m When is lar^c, the approxitnmion leading to cq. (8.46) no longer applies, and the spec-
trum of y{i^ depends on both th& amplitude and The spectrum of the mxlulating s^nal
Mf) With v(0 expressed in the lortn of eq. ^8.43), we note that thetemisi cos[msin&j,,,/]
and sin[/nsm w,,,/] are periodic s^nals with fundamentaf frequency a>m. Thus, the Fuurier tranifoiTTi of each of these signa3s is an impulse train with impulses at integer multiples of tiJrn 2U\d amp[itude!i proptMional to the Fourier series coefhcients. The tioefhcients for these two periodic signals involve a class of functions refened to as Bessel functions of the first kind. The first term in eq. (8.43) ttinresponds to a sinusoidal carrier oF the fomi
cosw.r amplitude modulated by the penodLi; signal c(is[ffrsin-ii,,,f| and the seamd term
m 10 a sinusoidal carriei sin w^ t amplitude modulated by the periodic signal sinl sin Eij^jf ]
MuUipTicatiun by the carrier signals has ihe effect in the frequency dcimain of translating the .^pectrun:! of c<5. {R.4?) ti> the cam*;f frequent;y, so that it is centered at plus and minus

.

I

.

61S

CommL^nication Systems

Chap, fi

> 0)^ . In Figures S, 35(a) and {b> we illustrate, foricj 0, the the magnitude of the spectra of
ihe two individual lentis in eq. (S.43), and in Figure S,35(c) the magnitude of the coirbined
spectrum re presenting the modulated signal y(0' The spectnim of y(t) consists of impulses
at frequencies Ýu*t + ^w^n 'i = 0, Ý1, Ý2, . ., and is not, strictly speaking, band limited
around ntj^.. However, the behavior of the Fourier senes coefficients af co^[tns\u<i>^r]
m and sinlmsinoifnl] are such that the amplitude of the Hth harmonic for |w| > can be
considered negligible^ and thus, the total bandwidth B of each sideband centered around
+ii}( and --{Oi is effectively limited to ImiAf^. That is£

B -- 2m(ji>,,,.

(8.48)

or, smtc m = kjAlMm -- Atu/oj,

B = IkjA ^ 2Aqj.

(J4.4-9)

Comparing eqs. (S39) and (8.49), we note that the effective bcindwidth of each
sideband is equal to the total excursion of the Instantaneous frequency arounc the earner

1.

,

1

,

J

.L

J,

A

A

+

1 1 llii 1 Ll
i^
(b)

1
JL
1' ^
i

' '1

.

1

JL

J

.

L

tjiiit.l. 4 tu

(c)

Figure S.35 MÈLgnitLid$ of spec-

trum of wideband frequency modula-

m tion with

= 12; |a) magnitude of

speclnim of (x>s^c^co&[msinÈj;n;i;

^b) magnitude of spectrurr of

sincL£clÈin{;r?Èin (nm^],
{t\ combined spectral maof^itude of
+ cos[&>t;f msinctJrtjtl.

.

Sec S 7

Si'iiJooidat -requency Modutaticn

617

frequency. Therefore, ftir wLdebind FM, since we assume thLit tt\ is large, ihe bandwidth
of the modulated signal is nauch larger than the bandwidth of the modulating signal, and
m tiontra^t to the nuirowband tase^^the bundwidth <jf the transmitted signal in wideband
FM is directly proportional to amplitude A of the modulating signal and the gain factor k^

8-7.5 PeriQdrc Square-Wave ModuHating Signal

Another example that lends insight into the properties of frequency modulatinnis that of 3

modulating signal which is aperiodic square wavt. Referring to eq, (8.39)^ let A/ ^ 1 so

Aw that

= A, and let jc(0 be given by Figure 8.36. The modulated si^al y{f) is illustrated

in FigureS.37. The instantiineousfriequency Jswt + Aiii when jif<^> is positive and oJh i<^

when x{t) is negative. Thus, v(0 ean also be written as

(8.50)

836 Figure

Symmetnc periodfc square v/ave.

Figure H.37 Frequericy modulation
with a periodic square-wave modulat-
ing signal

,

61a

Conrvnunicition Systems

Chap. &

where fit) is the symmetric square wave shown in Figure 8.38. Thus, for this particular

modulating signal, we are able to retMiit xht problem of determining the spectrum of the

FM AM signal >(i)as the determination of the spectrum of the sum of the two

signals in

eq.(H.50). Specificalij,

+ T^if^riji^ + ji^i - yAcu) -f RtU<^ - Jtf^^ + jAw)].

(8.51)

where RiJtii) is the Fourier transform of the periodic square wave rit) in Figure 8.38 and
-- RT(jttf) is the Fourier transform of r(t Tfl). From Example 4.6, with T = 47'|

and

Rj{j(a) = H{ju>)e--^'^'^^.

(8.5:^)

The TTia^nitude of the 5ipectrum of Yijtti) is illustrated in Figure 8.39. As with wideband

FM, the spectnim has the general appearance of two sidebands, centered around fo^ Ý Am,

< w > that decay for u* w^ -- Aa> and

id, + Agj.

r(t)

31

4

4

Figure s.3fl Symmetric square wave r(f) in eq (8 50).

V(jw)

^

"il lliiii

J iiiij

-- (tO^; iu)

¨r

liU. \i UlMlIM
+ {lUj i*i>)

> Figure 8,39 Magtiitude Of the spectrutn for cu

correspond jfig to fre-

quency modulation with a periodic square-wave modulating signaL Each of the

vertical lines in the ftgure represents an irrpulst of area proportipnal tc the

height of the hne.

>

S&c. BB

OisGrete-Time Modulation

ft19

FM Systems for the demodulation of

sigjiils typically are of two c>pes. One type of

FM AM demodulation system corresponds to concerting the

signal to an

signal through

differentiation, while demodulation systems of the second type directly track the phase or

frequency of the modulated signal. The foregoing discussion provides only a biief intro-
duction to the chai^cceri^tics of frequency modulation, and we have again seen hctw the

basic techniques develcipcd in Lhe earlier chapters can be exploited to analyze and gain an

insight into an iinpaitant class of systems.

8.8 DISCRETE-TJME MODULATION
8.8. 1 Discretfr-Time Stnusoidaf Amplrtude Modulation
A discrste-time amplitude modulation system is depicted in Fi^re 8.40, in which c[n]
is the carrier and x[n] die modulating signal. The basis for otir analysis of continuoustime amplitude modulation was the rnu^tiplication property for Founer tranafcnms-- specifically, the fact that multiplication in the time domain corresponds to convoluiioii in
the frequency domain. As we discussed in Section 5.5^ there is a corresponding pTOpeity for discrete-time signals which we can use to analyze discrete-time amplitude modulation.
Specifically^ consider
yin] = x[n]c[n].
With ^(c^'^), K(eJ'^), and CCt'J'") denoting the Fourier trartsforms of :r[n],ji;?jj, ^nd c[nl respectively, Y(,e^*") is pmpoitional to the periodic convolution ofXie^"^) and C^eJ^^y, thai
i^N

Since X(^-'")and C(^-''")aTe periodic with a period of Stt, the integration can be performed over any frequency interval of length Itt.
Let us first consider sinusoidal amplitude modulation with a complex exponentiat earner so that

As we saw in Section 5.2, the Fourier transform of c[tt] is a periodic impulse train; that is.

^ C^e^"^) =

27r^Cup -Uf,-\- klTT),

(8.56

jji^i

^ (^ ^^

4^ ^ln]

Flgute a*40 Discrete-time anpli-
ti>de modulation

620

Com muni cation Systems

Chap. 8

which is sketched in Figure 8,41 (b). With A(W'^)as ilJustratedin Figure 8.4 Ka), the spec-
trum of the modulated signal is that fihown in Figure 8,41 (c). In particuiar, we note that
= y(e^^) Xie^^*"~'"' '). This is the discrete-time counterpart to Figure 8J , and iiere again,
with x[ti] real, the modulated signal will be complex. Demodulation is accomplished by multiplylDg by e~-''^'" to translate the spectrum back to its original location on the frequency axi.s so that

= x\n]

y\n}e - H'j, n

(8.57)

As explored in problem 6,43, if Wf = 7rsothatc[n] =^ (- 1)", the result of modula-

tion in the time domain IS to change the algebraic signof jrln] for odd values of n, while in

bw the frequency domain the consequence is the interchanging of high and

frequencies.

Problem 6.44 explores the use of this type of modulation in utilizing a bwpass filttr to

achieve highpass filtering and vice versa.

As an alternative to a complex exponential carrier, we can use a sinusoidal cairier,
^ in which case, wldi x[n] real, the modulated signal y[n] will also be real. With r[n]

cos uicn, the spectrum of the carrier consisL<i of periodically repeated pairs of impulses at

-2t

^£

titu

{a)
Ct,]w

2lT

2^ A

-2-17

-2-niiiic

?ir 2ir

2'n

2TT+¨iir

- 2lT

+ llT tLt^

Figure B.41

= (a) Spectrum of x[/?]; [b) spectrum of c[ji]

e"^"; (c) spec-

trum ot y[n\ = x[fi\c[n].

Sec. 8.a

Orscrete-Tlme Modirlation

6ZI

m 4j^ ^ ÝW(^+ kliT, a& illustrated in Figure S,42<b). With X<fJ'^) as shown Figure S.42(a^,

the resulting spectrum for the modulated signal is shown in Figure8.42(cj andcorr<;sponds

= to replicating X(e'^) at the frequet^cies tt>

Ý<(>t + fe27r. In order that tlie individual

replications of A'(^ '*^) do not overlap, we require that

> (Ut

0)M

(8.58)

and
lir - Wv -- ^M > U>r + W M

or, et|uivaler;tly>

< - ÈJ,.

TT ftJ^,

(8,19)

The first condition is i<jentical to that in Section 8,2 for condnous-time sinusoidal ampii-
tude tnoduJatiun, while the .second results from, the inheretit periodicity of discrete -time

A -271 TT

j<(&i'^)
-(Oh ojm
(a)
CI en

A

Èti

OJ

tr

-2-Tr -^TT-'-tu^

t:*r {b)

2Tr-ui^

Zt

Ztt^u^p

til

A
-2-17 -2tt+Ci£,

y[eJ-)

^27r-titc-<W|y;i

Af A

A

u).

\ -=
f

ÈTT-<t>,

2tt

I'Tt^iA}^

til

{=)
Figure 8.42 Spectra jssoclated wJth discrete-time modLlatiofi u$ing a sintisiidai carrier; (^) spect^^um of a bandUmitfed-STg^al x[n]; (b) spectrum of a sir>irsoidal carrier signai c[n] = coS(t*crt; (c) spectrum of the modJiatad signai y[n] = x[f}]c[n].

622

Communication Systems Chap a

spectra. CombiTiing eqs. (8.58) and (8^9), we s&e ihai for amplitude modulation with a
sinu^idal carrier, we must restrict w^ so that

< {d\f Wr < TV -- iOm.

(8.60)

Demodulation can be atcompli.'^hed in a manner similar to that employed in mn-

rinuous tune. As illustrated in Figure K.43, multiplication of >[¨] with the same carrier

tjsed in the modutater results in several replications of the spectrum of the original signal,

= one of which is centered about lij

0. By lowpasts filtering to eliminate the unwanted

replicatitms of Xie-'^), the demodulated signal is obtained.

As should be evident from the foregoing discussion, analysis of discrete- time am-

plitude modulation proceeds in a nfiantier similar to that of continuous-Lime amplitude
m modulation, with only slight differences. For example, as e?(piored in Probletn 8,47,

the synchn>nous rnodutation and demodiilation system, the effect of apha.%e difference or

a frequency difference between the sinusoidal carriers in the modulator and demodulator

\s identical in both discrete and continuous time. In addition, just as in continuous time,

AMa^ we can usedistrete-time f^inusoidal

the basis for frequency-di vision mukipiexing in

cos tij.,n

Low pass Wef

*- x[nl

VfeJ'^)

A At^A A

.

.

-2tt
I

+ 2Tr (i>,

W(e"^]

^i Ai>K! AJA

-Sir

-T -w^

w,, TT

2Tr

at

-277

J-

2^

t£t

I'pgtfFie 8,43 System and associated
spectra for discrflt^-time syn^ihronoue demodulation

Sec e.9

Summary

623

discrete time Furthermore, as explored in Problem 8.48, we can also consider using
a distiete-titae signal to modulate a pulse train, leading to time-division multiplexing
of discrete-tiine signals.
The liviplemcntation of discrete- time multiplexing systems provides an exceiient ex-
ample of the flexibility of discrete-time processing in general arid the importance of the
PDM Gperdtvon of ups^mpling (see Section 7.5,2) in particular. Consider a diacrete-tirrie
M M system with sequences that we wish to fretjuency-division multiplex. With channels,
it is required that the spectral energy for each input channel Xi[n\ be band limited^ that is.

If the sequences originally occupied the entire frequency band corresponding, for example, to having sampled a set of continuous-time signals at die Nyquistrate, then they would first have icj be converted to a higher sampling r^e (i.e^ upsampJed) before frequency- division multiplexing. This idea is explored further in Problem R.33.

8.8.2 Discrete^Tlm^ IVansmodulation

One context in which discrete-time modulation is widely used, together with the oper-

ations of decimat]{>n, up&ampling, and interpolatiot^ ititroduced in Chapter 7, is digital

communication systems. Typically, in such systems continuous -time signals are trans-

mitted t>ver communication channels in the form of discrcte-time signals, obtained by

sampling. The continous-time signals are often in the form of time-division -multiplexed

(TDM) or frequency-division -multiplexed (FDM) signals. The signals are then converted

to discrete-time sequences whose values are represented digitally, for storage or long-

distance transmission. Iti some systems, because of different con.straints or requirements

at the transmjtting end and the receiving end, or because sets of signals that have been in-

dividually mijltipkxed by different methods are then multiplexed together, diere is often

TDM the requirement for converting from sequences representing

signaJs to sequences

representing FT>M signals or vice versa. This conversion from one modulation or multi-

plexing scheme to another is referred to as rransmodsjtalion or transftiultipUxing, In the

context of digital conununication systems, one obvious way of implementing cransmulti-

plexing is to convert back, to continuous -time signals, demultiplex and demodulate, and

then modulate and multiplex as required. However, if the new signal is then to be con-

verted back t(J a discrete-time signal, it is clearly more efficient for the entire process to

be carried out directly in tiie discrete-time dotnain. Figure &.44 shows^ in block diagram

TDM FDM form, the steps involved in converting a discrete-time

signal to a discrete-time

TDM signal. Note thatj after demultiplexiiYg the

signal, each channel must be upsampled

in preparation for frequency-divisioti multiplexing.

8.9 SUMMARY
In this chapter, we have examined a number of the basic concepts associated with t;om
m municallan systems. In particular, we have examined die concept of modulation, which
a signal we wish to communicate is used to modulate a second ^ignnl referred to as the

G

--

*0 -- jiz

^IZ --*^

--a

E

0^

Cm rt

f

5^
u

Of

a 6Z4

Sec. 3.9 Summary

625

carrier, and we have looked in detail at the concept of amplitude modulation. The proper-
ties of amplitude modulation are most easily interpreted in the frequency domain through
the multiplication property of the Fourier transform. Amplitude mc£dulaiiori with a complex exponential or sirtusoidal carrier istypically used to shift the spectrum of a signal in frequency and is applied, for example, in comnmnication systems to place the spectrum in a frequency range jiuitahle for transmission anti to permit frequency -division multiplexing. Variatitms of sinusoidal amplitude modulatioji, such a.s the insertior^ of a carrier signal for asynchronous systems and single- and dcuble-sidcband syslem.s, were
discussed.
We alSLk examined several other form-, of modulation -based coTrimunication.
In this regard, we brietly intmduced the concepts of frequeticy and phase rrwidijlation. Although these forms of modulation are more difficult en analyze in detail, it
IS possible to gain significant insight into their charactenstics through the frequency domain.
We further examined in some dt;uil amplitude modulation of 3 pulsed signal^
which Jed us to the concepts of time-division multiplexing and pulse amplitude modulation, in which successive sampler of a discrete-time signal ^re used to modulate the amplitude of a sequence of pulses. This led in turrt to an examination of discrete-time modulation and digital communication, in which the flexibility of discretetime processing facilitates the design and implementation of more sophisticated ccmmunication systems involving concepts such as pulse-code modulation and
transmudulation.

Chapter 8 Problems
The firsL section of problems belongs to the basic category, and the answers are provided in the back of the book. The remaining two sections contain problems belonging to the basic and advanced categories, respectively.

BASIC PROBLEMS WITH ANSWERS

S.1.

= Let jc{t) be a signal for which X(jii>)
specified as having the Fourier transform
signal mO) such that

when \tit\ - Yiji^y)

> w^. Another signal v<0 is 2Jf(j(Qj - w^ )>. Determine a

8£2,

IjEt j;(/} be a real- valued signal for which X(ya£) ^ Owhen|w[> l,fKX)ir. Supposing that v(0 = ÈrJ^''j:(On answer the foUcwing questions:
{a> What constraint should be placed on tj^ to ensure that x(t} is recoverable from

(b) What coDSlraint should be placed on aft to ensure that x{t) is recoverable from

626

Comnunjcation Systems

Chap, a

S3, Let jc(/) be a real-valued signal for which X{J(it} =
tude modulation is performed to produce the signal

> when |<t>| 2,000:r. Ampli-

^0 = jf(0 sin(2,0007r/).

A proposed demodulation technique h illustrated in Figure P8.3 where ^(0 i^ the
input yiT) is the output, and the ideal lowpass filter has cutoff frequency Z^UOOtt and passhand gain of 2. DetermiTie y(t).

3 ft) ^-Q)

Idea)
lowpass
filter

*- y<t)

costaaooirt}

Frgurc PB3

8.4. Suppose
= x{t) sin 20077-^ -I- 2sin4O07Tr
and
^(0 = j:iT)RiTi400^t.
If the product ^(f)(sin400iri) is passed through an ideal lowpass filter v^ith cutoff frequenc> 4O07r and passband gain of 2^ determine the signal obtained at ihe output of the lowpass filter.
8^, Suppose we wish to transmit the signal
sml.OOO'frt
x{t) Tt
uning a modu.laloj' that creates the signal
w(r) = ixU) + A)cos{IO,0007rO-
m Determine the largest permissible value of the modulation index that would allow
asynchronous demodulation to be used to recover x(t) from w(r). For this problem,
you should assume that the maximum magnitude taken on by a side lobe af a sine
function occurs at the instant of time that is exactly halfway between the two zero-
crossings enclosing the side lobe.
> 8.A. Assume that x{i) is a signal whose Fourier transform X{j<o) is zero for jai) fe>w.
The signal g(0 may be expressed in terms of a(j') as

^{0 = jt(r)cos<jf/ - x{i)zosoict*
TTt
> where * denotes convolution and o)^ lo^ Determine the value of the A constiiiit
such that

Chap. 8 Probler's

627

xU) = {g(Ocosctf,.0* Asinw^i/
TTt

A 8^7, An M-SSB/SC system is applied to a s ignal xU ) whose Fou rier transform X{ Jo) ) is
> zero for |iL£| w¨. Ihc carrier frequency w^ used in the system is peater thana£M,

Let g(t) denote the output of the system, assuming that on]> the upper ^ideband^

are retained. Let g{0 denote the output of the system, assuming that only the lower

sidebands are retained. The system in Figure P8.7 is proposed for converting g{t)

How into q(_t).

should the parameter tuy in the figure be related to &t^.? What shauld

be the vaLae of passband gain A ?

*- q{t)

COS(i)[)t

Figure P8.7

8,S. Consider the modulation system shown in Figure P8.S. The input signal xU) has a
> > Fourier transform A'C/ftj ) that is zero for !<(£[ wjw.Assutning that tu,. tu^, answer
the following questions:
(a) Is y(0 guaranteed to be real if jr(/) is real?
(b) Can xU) be recovered from >?(/)?

-i ,<o>o H{jw)-

slrnD^^t

Figure PS.a

^ 8*9* Two signals Xi(t) and X2it\ each with a Fourier b-ansform that is zero for jcd|

tor^ are to be combined u&ing fie quency-division multiplexing. The AM-SSB/SC

technique of Figure 8,21 is applied to each signal in a manner diat re lains the 1 ower

sidebands.

The

carrier frequencies used

for i] (i)

and

x^U)

are

tjj^

and

2^It^ ,

respec-

FDM tively. The two modulated signals are then surnmed together to obtain the

signal ^(O-

628

Communication Systems

Ctiap. 5

(*) For what values of qj is yijti>) guaranteed to be zero*?
<b) Specify the values of A and wa so that

jf](0= \{y(r)*=
\{

COStt^of

where * denotes convolutiijn.

8.10. Asignal j(r) is multiplied by the rectangular pulse train c(f) shown in Figure ?8. JO. (a) What constraint should be placed on Xija?) to ensure that xit) can be recovered from the product xi.t}ci[) by using an ideal lowpais filter? (b) Specify the cutoff frequency ic>^ and the passband gain A of the ideal lowpass filter needed to recover jf(0 frotri x(t)c(t)' [Assume that X(jw> satisfies the
constraint determined in part (a) j

at)

25x10 sec

8.11, L<ft

10 -3

10 ^
Figure P8. 10

2x10 -3

t[sec)

k = -^

whereao - Oand^j ?^ 0. be a real- valued periodic signal. Aiso Jet x(r) be a signal

^ ^ with Xijo?)

for |fÈ)| utJ2^ The signal xU) is used to modulate the earner c(0

to obtaiii

{a) Specify the passband and the passband gain of an ideal bandpass filter so that,
wilh input v(f), the output of the filler is

^ (b) If til

Iflik^^^U show that

^^f) ^ AcosioJ^r + c^MOh

and expr&';s A and *^ in terms of \a-i \ and <a].

8.12, Consider a set of 10 signals Aj(fX i = i,ZX..., 10. Assume that each x,(t) has

^ Fourier transfonn ^uch that A^Ki***) ^ Ofor|<^|

2,O0O7r. All 10 signals are to be

time-division multiplexed after each is multiplied by acarrier c(t) shewn in Figure

P8.12. If the period T afcit) is chosen to have the maximum allowable \'alue, what
A is the largest value of such that all 10 signals can be time-division miiltlpleAed'^

Chap. S Problems

629

-T

2T

Figure PB.12

A PAM 8£13. class of popularly used pulses in

are those which have a raised cosine fre-

quency response. The frequency response of one of the members of this class is

PU^) =
0,

elsewhere

where Ti is the intersyrabol spacing.
(a> Determint p{OX
Cb> Efetcrminc p{fcT^ ), where A = Ý],ÝZ....

S£14* Ctmsider the frequeacy -modulated signal

y(t) = cosf&jj.f - mcostu^r),

>> m << where Wt

u},n and

> ir/l. Specify an approximation to Y^j(t)^ for tu 0.

8£15- Fcir what v^aes of h^o in the range -tt < (Wq ^ tt is ampHtnde modulation with

carrier ei*^£" equivalent to amplitude modulation with carrier cosf^f^rtV

8J6. Suppose x[n\ is a real-valued discrete-time signal whose Fourier transform Xle^*^) ha.s the propeny that

X(e^^) =

for^ ^ a^ ^ 7T,
o

We use x[n] to modulate a siotJ$oidal caitier cln] ~ sin(577/2)n to produce

y{_f{\ -^ x[nlc[nl.

^ Determine the values of w in the range i^ &> tt for which Yie^"^ ) is guaranteed
to be zenj,
We 8,17, Consider an arbitrary finite -duration signal x[n] with Fourier transform X{e^'^)^
generate a signal g{n] througti insertion of zero- valued samples:

=_ ^[rt] = x^^^\n)

\ 4/1/41,

10,

n = (hÝ4,:tS,:t\2,...
otherwise

The signal g[n] is passed through an ideal lowpa^s filter with cutoff frequency ttH
and passband gain of unity ti> pjodiice a signal ^[ti\. Filially, we obtain

y[n] = q[n]co&i-^n

For what values of cu is Yie^*^) guaranteed lo be zero?

630

Communication Systems

Chap. &

8.18. Let Jt[rt] be a real- valued discrete-time signal whose Fourier iransform X(e''^) is

^ zem ft)T6j

ttM. We wish to obtain a signal y[n] whose Fourier [ran^fnim his the

propert> that^ in the interval -tt <v> :^ tt.

y(fJ^) =

0£

othenvise

The system in Figure PS. 18 is proposed for obtaining y[n] from a[h]. Determine constraints that the frequency response //(e-'^) of the filter in the figure must sal:isfy for the proposed system to wort.

3in(^n)

Figure P6.\e

^ 8.19, Consider If} arbitrary real'Valued signals j:t[n], i

1, 2, , , . , 10. Siippeseeach Xrln]

is upsampled by a factor of Af, and then sinusoidal amplitude modulation is appUed

y to it with carrier frequency tu; = iirno. Determine the value of which would

FDM guarantee that all 10 modulated signals can be sumtned together to yiejd an

signal y[rt] from which each Xj[n\ can be recovered.

8.20. Let V[[u] and v^in] be two discrete-lime signals obtained through the sampling <\^thout aliasing) of continuotLs-time signals. Let

^ y[n]

V[[n] + v^ln - 1}

TDM be a

signal, where, for i = 1.2.

v,h]-j^'[4 -=^'^'~'^^'^^-^

0.

otherwise

The signal >'[nj is processed by the system S depicted in Figure Py.20 to obtsin a signal g[n]. For tlie two filters used in 5,

< ^ J^n(^-^") = \'' 0. 5

w

TT

CVrap 8 PTohkems

631

I>etemiine the signal p[n\ used in S such that gin] represents frequency-divisioti multiplexing of V| [n] and v^C^j].
P[n]

*~ Hcte'^

ylnl

X

eJ*^Ho(eJ")

gin}

pln-^]
BASIC PROBLEMS

Figure P8.Z0

8.21. In Secixins 8.^ and 8.2, we analyzed the sinusoidal amplitude modulaiion and de-
modulation system of Figure g.8, assuming that the phase 6^ of the carrier signal was zero. (a) For the more general case of arbitrary phase (f^ in the figure, show that the signal
in tbe demodulation system can be expressed a^i
w(0 - -x(t) + -xit)cQ5(2a>,t + 20,1
^ fl>) If -t(f) has a spectnjm that is zero for |wf iu>j, determine the relationships
required among w^.^^ [the cutoff ftequency of the ideal lowpass filter in Figure S.8(b)], w^ (the carrier fceque^jcy), and iM>M so that the output of the lowpass filter is proportional to j:(^). Does your answer depend on the carrier phase 0^ 7 5.22. In Figure PB,22(a), a system is shown with input signal x(r) and output signal v(^) The input signal has the Fourier transform Xljat) shown in Figure P8. 23(b). Determine and sketch YijatX the spectrum of ^(0

t^^.

1
-5w -3w 3w 5w u*

C03|5wt)

3w

3w

- y^t)

432

Comnmnicatton Sterns

Ciap. 8

(b)

Figure P8.2Z CoTttlrtuecl

8,23. In Secticn 8^2, wc discussed the efTeci of a loss of synchronization in phase between Qie carrier signals in Qie modulator and demodulator in sinusoidal amplitude modu-
latj^n, We showed that the output of the demodulation h attenuated by the cosine of
the pha^e difference, and in particular, when the modulator and demodulator have a phase difference of 7r/2, the demodulator output is lefo. As we demonstrate in
this problem, it is also important to have frequency synchronization between the modulator and demodulator.
Consider the miplitude modulation and detnodul^tion systems in Figure 3.8 with 6f = and with a change in the^i^^u^ncyof the demodulator carrier so that

wijcre
y{t} = x(r)cosWr/.
Lee us denote the diiference in frequency between the modulator and demodulator
asiw (i.e.,it>j-<t>i = iti>), Also> assume that j;(f) is bard limited with X'(yw) =
m for \o>] ^ (OMy and assume that the cutoff frequency w^^ of the lo^pass filter the
demodulator satislies the inequality

(a> Show that the output of the lowpass filter in the demodulator is proportional to
jcf^l cos(Au>0-
(b) If the spectrum of x(t) is that shown in Figure PS. 23, sketch the specirum of the
output of the demodulator.

Figure Pe.23
8J4, Figure PS. 24 shows a system to be used for sinusoidal amplitude mgdulation, where
> xir) is band hmited with maiimum frequency tu^, so that X{jto) = 0, |a^| com-

4
.

Chap. 8 Problems

633

A^ indicated, the signal .v(/) is a periodic smpuisc train with period T and with an

ofFiiet from f =^ nf A. The system Hijoi) is a bandpass filler

^ ^ (a) With A ^ 0, w,if

-TrtlT, &j/ = ^rriT, and w^

3W7, show that >(/) is pro-

portional to j:(Ocostj,^, where w, = I^IT

(h> If oi^^, aif, and w^, are the same a& given in part (a>, but A is not necessarily

+ zero, .show that y{i'\ V\ proportional to x(f) cosfio^^ ^i X and determine i^/^ and 0^ as a function of T and A.

(c) Determine the maximum allowabJe value of tt^w r^elative to T such that y(/) is + pmpiirtional to j;(Ocos(tL£^.f È^^.).

>(t)

^ H(jwi

^y[t)

sin

t

t

t 1

I

t

A [T+i) {2T+^)

t

A

'^

<*>h

Figure PS, 2

8<25* A commonly used system to maintain privacy in voice communication is a speech

scrambler As illustrated in Figure P8,25(a), the input to the system is a noimal

speech signal x{t} and the output is the scrambled version y(r}^ The signal y{t) is

transmitted and then unscrambled at the receiver.

We assume that all mputs to the scrambler are real and band limited to the
> frequcTicy (u^; that is. X{jto^ == for |it>| iij^. Gi\en any such input, oui pro-

posed scrambler permutes different bands of the spectrum of the input signaJ. Jn

addition, die output signal is real and band limited to the same frequency band; that

> ^ is, Yijtoy

for |ft>[ ionf. The specific algorithm for the scrambler is

> Y{joi}

^

Xij{<o

<*>w)),

È^

0,

<a) If X( jtd) is given by the spectmm &tiown in Figure P&.25<b>, sketch the spec-
truni of the scrambled signal y{ty (b) Using amplifiers, multipliers, adders, oscillaiors, and whatever ideal filters you
find necessary, draw the block diagram for such an ideal scrambler. {t) Again using amplifiers, multipliers, addend, oscillators, and ideal filters, draw a
block diagram for the associated unscrambler.

634

Comfflunicalion Systems

Chap 8

{Normal speech)

y(t)

Scrambler

ff^btiW

y(t}

V^nM

Unscramble)'

(a}

^{t)

XtJoJj

A!\

Figure ^B.2S

8.26£ In Section 8.2.2, we discussed the use of an envelope detector for asynchronous

AM demodulation of an

= signal of the form y{t)

+ + An [jc(t) A] cos(fij^f d,).

aJtemative demodulation system, which aJso does not require phase synchronisa-

tion, butddes require frequency synchronization, is shown in block diagram fonn

in Figure P8,26. The lowpass filters hoth have a cutoff frequency of ti), . The signal

yit) ^ U(0 + + /I] cos(Èij,r 6, X wither constant but unknown. The signal j(0 ii
> < band Hmjted with Xijto) = 0, tu| w^, and with w/a qj, . As we required for

> the use of the envelope detector, x{t) + ^

for all /.

Show that die siystem in Figure P8.26 can be used to recover xO) from yit)

without knowledge of the cnodul^tor phase &^ .

A

l_owpass
filter

Sqiuarer

y(t)

Square
r(t)
1

Lowpa^
filtar

Squarer

,

L

sln(iif,t
Flgure PB.2 6 8,27. As discussed in Section 8.2.2, asynchronous modulation -demodulation requires the
injection of the carrier signal so that the modulated signal is of the form

Chap.S Problems

635

W y(t) =^ + xmcGs{<a,t + BA

(?E.27-\)

where A + t(0 > for all r. The presence of the earner meatis thai more tran smitter

power is required, representing an inefficiency.

= w^ > (a) Let jc{r) cos w^t with

<: ta^ and A + jc(f) 0. For a periodic signa] yiO

with period r.theavcrage power overtime is defined as /*3. = (UT} jj y^it)dr

Determine and sketch Pv for y(t) in eq. (P8h27-1). Express your answer as a

function of the mcMJulation index m, defined a^the mAximum absolute value of

T(f) divided by A.

(h) The efficiency of transmiasion of an amplitude-modulated signal is defined to

be the ratio of the power in the sidebands of the sigjial to the total power in the
< signal. With x(t) = cosu^f. and with oiM w^ and A + jf(0 > 0, determine

and sketch the efficiency of the tnoduUted signal as afiinction of the modulation

index m.

*^8* In Section 8,4 we di&cussed ihe impjementation of single-sideband modulation u^ng 90* phase-shift networks, and in Figures 8,21 and S.22 we specifically illustrated
the system and associated spectra required to retain the tower sidebandjs. FigiJre P8.28(a) shows the corresponding system j^uired to retain the upper
sidebands.

COStU^t

sirn^^t la)

fb)

Figure F8.2S

636

Communication Systems Cha^ 8

(a) With the same ^tjw) illustrated in Figure 8.22, sketch Ytiji^), YiiJ^X ant*
y(J<f>) for the system in Figure P8.2S(a), and demonstrate that only the upper sidebands are retained. (b) For JlC^w) itnaginaiy, as illustrated in Figure P8.2Stb), sketch Yi (ytu)* Viiju)], and YU*^) for the system in Figure P3. 28(a), and demonstrate that, for this case also^ only the Qpper sidebands are retained.
H.Z9. Single sideband modulation is tommonly used in point-to point voice comitiunicatson. It offers; many advantages, including effective use of available power, oonservation of bandwidth, and insensitivity to some forms of random fading in the channel. In double-sideband suppressed carrier (DSB/SC) systems the spectrum
m of the modulating signal spears in its entirety in tv/o places the transrnitted
spectrum. Single- sidet>and modulation eliminates this redundancy, thus conserving bandwidth and increasing the signal-to-noise ratio within the remaimrii^ portion of the spectrum that is transmitted.
In Figure P3.29(a), two systems for generating an amplitude-modulated single-sideband signal are shown. The system on the top can be used to generate a si ngle- sideband signal for which the lower sideband is ret^ned, vind the system on the bottom can produce a single-sideband signal for which the upper sideband is
retained.
(a> For X(j<jf) as shown in Figure PR.Z9(b), detenninc and ?ketch S<ju)>, the Fourier uansform of the lower sideband inodutated signal, and RiJKv), the Fourier transform of the upper sideband modulated signal. Assume that

The upper sideband modulation scheme is particularly useful with voice

coinmunicadon¨ as any real filter has a finite transition region for ihc culoff

(i.e., near ujA- This region can be acooTunvodated with negligible dibtortion.

since the voice signal does not have any significant energy nearju =
|fti|<iOi = Sir x40Hz).

(i.e., for

(b) Another procedure for generating a single-sideband signal is termed the phase-

shift method and is illustrated in Figure PS.2?(c). Show that the single-

sideband signal generated is proportional to that generated by the lower

sideband modulation scVieme of Figure F^.29(a> i;i,e., p{i) is proponjonal

to <r)l
(c) All three AM-SSB signals can t£e demckJulafed using the scheme shown on
the right-hand side of Figure PS.29(a). Show that, whether the received sig-

nal i.s s(j)t ril\ or p{tX as long as the oscillator at the receiver is in phase
with oscillators at the transmitter, and w = w^ , the output of the demodulator

is x{t).

The distortion that results when tlie oscillator is not in phase with the trans-

rnitter. c^iUed quadrature distortion^ cran be particularly troublesome in data

communication,

SJO.

Amplitude modulation with a pulse-train carrier may be modeled as jn Figure

P8.3(Ha). The output of the system is ^0-

^ (a) Let x{t) be a band-limited signal lie,, X(juf) ^ 0, \w\

tt/T], an shown irt

Figure P8 30(b). Determine and sketch Rijut^ and Qij<ay.

^fl"-- -'ñfijS-

COSU^t

CDSCi>^t

^rt*- -mA

Mt)
"Lie

U 'Ulr (1>^

--{t)

cosu^t
(a)

X[j^)

C0S4i]f,t

^^

ti*3 ~tt>j ^ b>|

tO| Wj tua

tij

(bl

xft)

H(iw) +i
(ii
-J

sinu^t

Figure P8,Z9

637

638

CammLii^ication Systems

Chap S

(b) Find the maximum v^ue of A such that w(t) = x(t) with an appropriate filter = (c) Determine and sketch the compensating filter AJ(jftj) such that >v(r^ x{t).

PAM aystem

hit)

x(t)

r(t)

qCt)

W{t)

Ý1

M[ju.)

-^^2 ^^2

n- >-

{b}

Figure P8.30

8L31. Let x[n] be a discrete-time signal with Spectrum X(^^'' X and let p{T) be a continuous-

We ame pulse function with spectrum Fijtii).

form the signal

^ yit) =

- Jc[n]/J(f n).

fa) I>eterniine the spectrum Yijiii) in temis of Xi^e^^ ) and P< jti)

=
P<J)

cos^TTf.
0,

^ r ;^ I
elsewhere

PU^) detenniJie

aiid Yijoj).

S32, Consider a discrete-time signal x\n] with Fourief transform shown in Figure PS.32{a). The signal is amplitude moJuiated by a sinusoidal sequcriL-e, as indi-
cated in Figure P8.32(bj.

Chap. 6 Problems

639

(£) Determine and sketch Y{e^"*), the Fourier Lransform of y[n],
(b> A proposed demodulation system is shown in Figure P832(t:). For what value
G otflf ,aiip, and will At n] = ^[rt]? Are unyrestrit:t.iors on iti^. and^^ip necessary
to guarantee that JÈ[m| is recoverable from y[rt]?

>^H-

H^}

^ /i^I

co&tti^n
(t>)

*~ x[n;

cos-fni^.n+tPc

Figure pa 32

833. Let usi consider the frequency- division mulLipleKing of discrete-time signals x.[n],

( = 0, 1,2,3. FurtiieTmore. each x,[n] potentia[ly occupies the entire frequency

band

--
( tt

<

a£

<

tt).

The

sinusoidal

modulation

of upsampled

versions

of each

of these signals may be carried out by using either double-sideband techniques or

single- sideband techniques.

(a) Suppose each signal XrlflJ is appropriatejy ups&mpled and then modulated with

cos[/CTT/4)rtl. What is the minimum amount of upsampling that must be carried

FDM out on each x,ln] in order to ensure that the spectrum of the

signal does

not have any aJiasitig?

(b) If the upsampling of each x,[n] is restricted to be by a factor of 4, how would

FDM you use single- sideband techniques to ensure that the

signal dues not have

any aliasing? Hint: See Problem SJ7.

640
ADVANCED PROBLEMS

CDmmunication Systenns

CMap 8

ip.34. III discussing amplitude modulation systems, modulation and demodulation were

carried out Lhryu^h the use vi a multiplier. Since multipliers are often difticuU to
itnplecTient, many practical systems use a nonlinear element. In this problem, we

jUustratc the basic concept.
In Figure PH34, we sh&v/ tiTie such nonlinear system tor amplitude modu-

lation. The system consists of squaring rhe sum of the modulating signal and the

carrier and ihen handpas.s filtering to obtain the amplitude-modulated signal.

^ M Assume that jf(f) is bund limited, .so that Xijai)

0,

'^ tti,^- Eteter-

mine the bandp:t^s filter parameters A. w^, and wij such that >(/) is an amplitude-
modulated version of j:{t) [i.e., such that y(f) -- x{t) can o); t]. Specify the neL'essaiy

constraints, if any. on to,

and iii\f .

COSftiN^tJ

K(t)

e-- {H^

M>)
A-

-tUh -(lJ|

<*j tn^ tll

Ë[t)

Figure P6.34

S>35. The modulation -demodylatioji scheme proposed in this probiem is similar to sinu-
soidal amplitude modulation, except that the demodulation is done with a square wave with ihe same zero-crossings as af^to^t. The system is shpwn in Figure P8. 35(a); the relation between cos tu,/ and /?(/) is shown in Figure P8. 35(b). Let the
input ELgnal x{f} be a band limited signal with maximum frequency w¨ < w, . as
sh&wn in Figure PS. 35(c). (a) Sketch and dimensidn t;hereal andimaginaty parts of Z(yftj), F{J<i}\, and^tytu^
the Fourier transforms of z(/). p(t)^ and y{t)^ respectively,
{bj Sketch and dimension a filter E{jw) so that v(0 = Jf(/)-

ModuJatJon
Id)
t
COÈUJ,-t (a)

Demodulaitk>rt

y(t}
<E>
t

H(ju.)

--i ^vfij

Figure Pe,3S

Chap, 6 ProbLarni

641

1.

-2*j>^ -(iic-<yM

<dm <^<z

2m^, o)

to

Figure PS.3S Continued

^^{Xtj\o,,
tUHV^4 Wu tiJ

8*36. The accurate demultiplexirtg-deTDOdulatioi: gf radio and television signals is generally performed using a system called the siipertieterodync receiver, which is equivalent to a tunable filtei. The basic system is shown in Figure P8,36ta) (a) The input signal y{t) consists (if the superposition of tnany amplitude-mtjdnlated signals that have been multiplexed using frequency-division muhipJexing, so
that each Nignal occupies a different frequency chamicL Let us consider one such
channel thai c^jntiins the amplitude- modulated aignaJ y\{i) ^ jf|(f)cos tJr't with spectrum I'jljco) as d&picted at the top of Figure PS. 36(b), We want to de-
muitiplex and demodulate y\ (0 to recover the modul siting signd J^i(Oj using the system of Figure P8. 36(a). The coarse tunable filter has the spectrum H\{jai)
shown at the bottom of Figure ?8. 36(b). Determine the spectrum Z(y<i>) of the :n-
put signa] to the fixed selective filter Hiijd^). Sketch and label Zijui) for
w > 0.
(b) The fixed frequency-i^elective filter is a bandpass type centered aiound the fixed
frequency <iif, as shown in Figure P8. 36(c). We would like the output of ihe filter with spectrum H^O'w) tobeHf) = X){/)cos&iyf. In terms of (i>^ anda^jW^
what constraint must u>j satisfy to guarantee that an undistorted spectrum of
M it) is centered around ii> ^ ojfl
(c) What must G. a, and ^ be in Figure PS. ?6<c> so that r(f) = :t|(Ocosw^r?
8^37. The following scheme has been proposed to perform amplitude modulation The in-
put signal x{t) is added to the carrier signal cos w^f and then put through a nonlinear

642
Coarse tunable
y(t) filler
H.ljw) Yi]^)

Oscilalor

Communication S/siems

Cnap. 8

+ COS(ui^ Wfit

To demodulator

Vi{j*^)

Hiljm]

Input signaf

Hn(jW)

tMc -Wt

Wc "*i>M ti^c lOc+^ttlM Coarse tunable f flter

tL|iH;+tl>T Im)

Figure P8.B6

Chap 8 Prcblamg

£43

device, so thai the ompui ^f/> is reJated fo tht mput by

_ s(0

^Uf>
1.

y(0 = .T(f) + cosAiif.

This IS illustrated in Figure PS37<a), Such a nonlinear relation can be implemented through the current- voltage characteristics of a diode, where, with i(/) and v{t) the diode and current and voltage, respectively,
^XO-V^'^-l (a real).
To study the effects of tionlinearity, we can examine the spectrum of z{s) and how it relates to Jf(;-w) and w^. To accomplish this, we use the ptiwec series for e>\
which is

(a) If the spectrum of :c(0 is given by Figure P8.37(b), and if cuc ^ 1 00a> i , sketch and label Z{jti>), die spectrum of zU\ using the first four terms in ihe pewer
series for ^"^^
(b) The bandpass filter has parameters as shown in Figure P837(c). Determine the range of a and the range of ^ such that rit) is an amplitude- modulated version
of-v(0.

y{t)

z(t) BPF

m)

s = e^-i

GOSCU^l

(a)
x(i¨]

I

1

-P -a

i^)

Figure Pa.37

8JS. In Figure P8. 38(a), a commut^ication system is shown that transmits a band-limited

Msignal xO) as periodic bursts of high-frequency energy. Assume that Xijt^) = for > w^. Two passible choices, m^{i] and m^fO, are considered for the modulating

m A signal mKiy.

(0 is a periodic train of sinusoidal pulses, each of duration

as

shown in Figure P8.3&(b). That is.

È44

Commiinicdtion Systems

Chap.B

'ivhere

^ mi (0 =

P(i- f^Tl

^= ^

^^^

[ 0.

\t\ > {Dm

m2it) Is CCS Wt/ periodically blanked or gated; thar is, /rt2(0 = ^U) cos ijj^t, whert
g(t) is a& shewn in Figure P8,3S(b),

m[t)

KftJ

.^

COSWft
r^ ^^-L.^^_
i^)
pit)

-D/2

/2

mi(t)

U T A vAy_w iIVA-7\-VA.'\

f
-012*--

\ n:

\

A:

y. \J:\}\

t

9

x_,, 1 r

1

1

-UI2

D/2

T

t

Ti; (t)

\A A '\J.\aXJ/:

U7 V A;
l/_

V A^A7

:\i/A/_V/:

t

Fj gure P8.38

"

Chap 8 P'oblems

645

The following relationships between the parameters T, D, t)^ . and cd^ are
assumed:

>> D' {l)r

2tt_

2tt
> 2aM.

>> Also, assume that [siii(j:)]/:r is negligible for jc

1.

Determine whether, tor some choice of wip, either nti (/)or m^U) will result in

a demcidulateJ signal jc(0 Por each i:ase in \^hich yotir answer is yes, determine an

acceptable range for t>ip.

&*39.

Suppq.se we wish to communicate one of two possible messages' message mn or

message mi . To do so, we will send a burst of one of two frequencies over a time

interval of length T. Note that T is independent of which message is being trans-

mitted. For message my we will send cosÈt>o^ and for message rm we will send

MO cosu>|/. Thus, a burst

will look as shown in Figure P839{a), Such acommuni-

mott)
Kaa/v-,
i(t)
Iwww, .
t3)
COSca^t

1'
b(t).

Line "w^'
r

1 1^^
Y
COSdF^t

r Una "m,
(h)
Figure PS .39

Choose maximum
of the absolute
values

^ 'rrin-or
mi"

646

Communication Systems Chap. S

cation system Is talled/re^wertt;^' shijf keying (FSK). When the burst of frequency
b(T) is received, we wish to determine whtrher it represents message m,^ or message m\,Jo accompiisJi this, we do as illustrated in Figure PS.39(b). (a) Show that rhe maximum difference between ihe absolute values of [he two line>
in Figure P839(b) occurs when cotiWQf and cus <:> i f have the rela;]onship

u

(b) J.s ]t possible to choose wc. and w such thai there in no inter/al of length T for i which

T

= COS fti o' COS ft> I f(Jr

0?

8*40. In Section 8.3, we discussed the use of sinusoidal modulation for frequency-

division multiplexing whereby several signals are shifted into different frequency

bands and then summed for simultanebus transmission. In the ctirrent problem, we

explore anodier multiplexing concept referred to as quadrature mitlnpkxing. In this

multiplexing procedure, two signals can be transmjtted simu Itemed u sly in the same

fnequencry band if the two carrier signals are ^CToutot phase. The multiplexing syii-

tern is shown in Figure P3.40<?l) and th^ demuhiplexing system in Figure P8,40(b)

y\{t) and x^^t) are both ^tssumed to be band limited with masimuTn frequency ft£jw,

-- = > so that X]_ijii})

Xnijtii)

for \vj\ oi^. The carrier frequency tit^ is assumed

to be greater than (J a; Show that j|fO = xj(f) and ^^{O = X2(fy

COStO-t

>At)
xs(t)

-- r{t) multiplexed sigraJ

(a)

Ffgure PS,40

8,41. In pRibiem 8.40, we introduced die concept of quadrature multiplcxmg, whereby

W two signals aie summed after ejich has been nvjduUted with carrier signals of iden-

tic a] freque:nc7> but with a phase difference of

. The corre spondi ng disc rcte-time

multiplexer and demultiplexer are shown in Figure P8.4L The ii^u-dL x\[n] and

jf^Lnl arc botti assumed to be band limited with maxinium frequency ti>,v^, so that

< < Xiir^'") = X^ii^J'") = f(.Ti>jvf

Qj

27r - o>m.

Chap. S Problems

COSU]^t

x)

^ H{j[i>)

m

yi(t)

Demurt plexec outputs

Ern (i>^t

647

Xi[n]
£i?[nl

cosoi^n

Figure PA. 4-0 Contiftued
r[n) = murtipE&Èed signal

cQSWrn

rM.

antUnH

(b)
Figure PS. 41

DemuKiplaxdd outputs

643

Communicatian Systems

Chap. 8

^ (b) Determine the range of values for fdf so that T| [n] and -liT"! ^^^ recovered

from r{Fi\.
(b) With <Wt satisfying the conditions in part (a), deteimine H{e^^) no thai vi [¨1 =

j:][n]and j'2[¨] =- X2[til

PAM 8.42. In order to avoid intersymbol interference, pulses used in

systems are designed

to be 7-ero at integer niuhiples of the symbol spring T] In this problem* we develop a class of pulses which are zero at t = kTi, k = ^l, :r2, Ý3

Consider a pulse piiO that is real and even and that has a Fourier transform

P\{jtii). Also, assume that

(a) Define a periodic sequence pi(t) with Fourier transform

and show that
.27r

(b) Use th& result of the pirevicxjs part to show that for some T pdi) = 0, t = kT, k ^ Q, Ý2, Ý4,.. .

(c) Use the result of the previous part to show that

PiikTi) = 0, k = Ý],-2, Ý3, .. .

(d^ Show that a pulse pit) with Fourier transform

M (l + PiiJw).

^ f^

\ 0,

otherwise

aJso has the property that

pikT,) - a i = Ý],ÝZÝX..-.

PAM 8.43£ TTie impulse response of a channel used for

communication is specified by

Kn = 10,000^"^'^^u(0.

It IS assumed that the phase response of the channel is approximately linear in the
A bandwidth of the channel. putse that is received after passing through the channel
is prtx;essed using an LTI system S with impulse response g{t) in order to compen-
sate for the nonuniform gain over the charuiel bandwidth.

Chap. 8 Problems

649

(a> Verify that if ^f/) has the Fourier Lransfiirm
^ Gij<!f) A + jBu>,
A where and B are real constants, theti ^(/> can cotnpensatc for the nonunifomi gain over the channel bandv^idth. Determine the values of A and B.
(b) It is proposed that 5 be implemented with the sy^Hem shown in Figure PS-43.
^ Determine the values ijf the gain factors a and in this system.

-- Kft)
(Received srgnal before compensation)

> DifferenTi^cir

>

(Received signal after compensation)

Figure P8,43

ft.44. In this prohJem, we explore an equalization method used to avoid intersymbol in-

RAM tetference caused in

systems by the channel having nonlinear phase ever its

bandwidth

RAM When a

pulse with zero-crossings at integer nfiultiples of the sytnbol

spacing 7'i is passed through a channel with nonlinear phase. The received pulse may

no lunger have zero-crossings at times that are mteger multiples of J\ . Therefore, in

orderto avoid iniersymbcl interference^ the received pulse is passed through a zenr-

fifrring eqttaiizcr. which forces the puli^ to have zer{>-cr{)ssmgs at Integer muttipJes

of Ti . This equalizer generates a new pulse y(t) by suinmiiig up weighted and shilteU

vcTfiioriK of the received pulse x{t). The pulse yit) is given by

y y(n =

w
lifxit - ITi).

i^ -,V

(P8.44^1>

where the a; are all real and are chosen such that

yOcT, ) ^

1, k = Q

(a> Show that the eqtjalizer is a filter and determine its impulse response,

(b) To illustrate the seleetum of the weights ai, let u^ consider an ex<iiiiple. If

OXxOO j(Ori) = O.0,x{-T\) =

> - -0.2, and jfjtn) - for |i'| K de^

tcrmine the v^alues of cju, m.und a \ such that \iÝT^) ^ 0.

650

CommuFifcationSybtems

Chap 8

8.45.

A FM band-limited signal -vC') is \<y be transmitted using narrowband

techniques.

That is, the niodulation index m, as defined in Section 8.7, is much less than ir/2.

Before

x{t)

is

transmitteii

to

the

tnodalator,

it

is

processed

so

thai

X{J(it)\^ = i,

=

andj^(r)|< 1 This normalized ^(0 is now used to angle-modulaie a carrierto form

FM the

signal

m = y{T) cos|t>^r +

x(r)dT

i:

<aj I>eterniiinc the instanUneoas frequency cu,.

<< (b) Using eqs. (8.44) and (8.45K the narrowband assumption (m

Tr/23, and the

preceding normalization conditions, show that

^ ,v(r) toswt^ ~ lTM

j(t)Jt I &in(l^r^

(c) What is the relationship among the bandwidth of >(/). the bandwidth of j:(/), and the carrier fretjuency w.?
8.46. Consider the complex exponential function of time.

= i-(t)

eJ**^'',

(PS 46-1)

where 6(r) = o>o/^^2.

Since the instantan^uiDs frequency w^ = d9/di is also a Function of time, the

FM signal ^(0 may be regarded as an

signal, Tn particular, since the signal sweeps

linearly through the fr^uency spectrum with time, it is often called a frequency

''chirp" or "chirp signal.'

(ft) Determine the instantaneous frequency.

(b) Determine and sketch the magnitude and phase of the Fourier transform of the
"'chirp signal." To evaluate the Fourier transform integral, you may find it help-

ful Lo complete the square in the exponent in the it^tegrand and to use the relation

" ^

[^

-- -IL

LTI

jjit}

*"G)

^ £i(t)-s.:i)

*^(^

*~ ^^^^

t
s'(t)

t
5'(t)

Figure P8.46

Chap. 8 Problems

651

m (c) Consider the system in Figure P8.4ft, in which s(J) is the "chirp siE^val"
eq. (P8.46-1), Shovi that yU) = XijdioOi where X{j(o) is Lhe Fourier trans-
form of j(;).
(NoW: The system in Figure P8.46 is referred to as the 'chirp" tran^joim algo-
riihm and is often used in practice to obtain the Fourier translorm of a signal.)

8^47£ fn Section S,S we considered synchronous discrete-time modulation and demod-

ulation with a sinusoidal carrier. In this problem we want to consider the effect of

a loss in synchroniiation in phase and/or frequency. The moduJation and demod-

ulation systems arc shown in Figure P8.47(a>, where both a phase and frequency

difference between the modulator and demodulator carriers is indicated. Let the

Aw frequency difference of^ -- w^. be denoted as

and the phase difference O^j -- 6,

(ai) If the spectrum of Ji[n] is that shown in Figure P8.47{b), skttch the spectrum

of w'[rtl, assuming i(d = 0.

w (h) [f Aot = 0, show that can be chosen so that the output r[tt\ is r[n] =

jc[nlcosifl. In particular, what is r[rtl if AS = irfT?

w w^ (c) For Ad = 0, and =

-- + Act>, shtjw that the output r\n\

Jt[nlcos[A<t>rt|

(a^^sume that Aa> is small).

cos[u>^-n-i-Bcl

0O5 [w^n + tt^,
(aj

*- rfn]

AT

- tlt|y

<M
¨M TT

(b)

f^igurr PS. 47

&.48, In this problem, we consider the analysis of discrete-time amplitude modulation of a pulse-train carrier The system to be considered is shown in Figure P8.48(a^.

&52

Communication Systems Chap d

(a) Determine and sketch the discrete-time Fourier Lransfomi of the periodic

square-wave iigtial p\n] in Rgure Pii.48(a).

ib) Assume thar^[f^]has the spectnim shown in Figure P848(b).WiLhii>,^j -- TrflN

M and with

= 1 in Ficure P8.4S(a), sketch Y(e^*^\ the F&uricr iraiistorm of

^m Now (c)

assume that X(e^^'') is known to be band limited with Jf(^^^} - 0.

<

h) < Itt - bi\f^ but is otherwise unspecified. Forthesysiem of Figure PR .48(a).

determine, as a function of A', the maximum allowable value of ^jat that will

permit Jt[¨J to be lecgvered from y[fi]. Indicate whether your resuh depends

on M.

(d) With wjtf and A^ satisfying the condition determined in part (c), state or show in

bflack diagram form how to reoover x\n] from y\n].

[n]

*"ˋ ^ Vir^^

f
p[nl

jiL Dm ¨****#**^

01-"W

N (N + M)

(a}

(b)

Figure PS. 48

S.49. In practice it is often very difficult to build an ainpli^cr at very low frequencies. Conseqaenlly, low-frequency iimplifiers typically exploit the principles of ampiitude modulation to shift the signal into a higher-frequency band. Such an amplifier is referred to as a chopper ampHjier aod is illustrated in the block-diagram form in Figure PS.49.

Figure P8.49

Ciap. fi Prob.ems
&ft)

65B

-T

OIL

42

Hi(M

JZ^ A '

_a3r

31

T

T

T

T

H2(ju>l

T

T

Figure P8 49 Continued .

(a) I>etertnine in terms of T the highest allowable frequency present in x{t\ if y{t)
is to be proportional to x{i) (i.&., if the overall system is lo be equivalent to an
an^pUfier).
(h) With x(t) bandlimited as specified in part (a>, determine the gain of the overall
system in Figure P8,49 in terms of A and T.

.
9
The LAPLACE TRANSFORM

9.0 INTRODUCTTON

654

In the preceding chapters, we have seen that the tools of Fourier analysis are extremely useful in the study of many probiemsof practical importance involving signals atwd LTI
systems. This is due in large partro thefaci thai broad classes of signals can be represented as linear combinations of periodic complex exponentials and that c{>mpSex e:cponentials are eigen functions of LTI systems. The continuous-tinne Fourier transform provides us with a representation for signals as linear cotnbtn^ors of complex c?tpanentials of the form
e^' with s = j<i>. However the eigenfunctton property introduced in Section 3.2 and many
of its consequences apply as well for arbitrary values of s and not only those values that are purely iniaginary. This observation leads to a generalization of the eontinuous-time
Fourier transfomi, known as the Laplace transform, which we develop in this chapter. In
the next chapter we develop the corresponding discrete-time generalization known as the
^-transform.
As we will see, d>e Laplace and z-transforms have many of the properties that make
Fourier analysis so useful. Moreover, not only do diese transfottns provide additional tools and insights for signals and systems that can be analyzed using the Fourier transform, but ihey also can be appMed in some very itnportant coMexts in which Fourier transforms cannot. For example Laplace and ^-transforms can be applied to the analysis of many un stable systems and consequently play an important role in the investigation of the stability or instability of systems. This fact£ combined with the algebraic properties that Laplace and ^-transforms share with Fourier transforms, kads to a very important set of totds for
system analysis and in particular for the analysis of feedback systems, which we develop
in Chapter 1 1

Sec, 9,1

The Laplace Jrarisfornn

6S5

9,1 THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM

In Chapter 3, we saw that the response of a linear tLme-invariant system with LmpuLsf
response ft(r) to a complex exponential input of the form e''' is

yit) = Hisye"^,

(9A)

where

ms) =

hV)e-''dr.

(9.2)

For s imaginary (i.e., :t = jtu), the integral in eq. (9.2) corresponds to the Fourier trans-
fcirm of h{i\ For general vaines of the compiex variable j, it is referred to as the Laplace transform of the impnl&e respcfnse hiO-
The Laplace transfonn of a general signal x(t} is defined as'

(9.3)

and we note iit particular thaA ift is a function of the independent variable s corresponding

to the complex variable in the exponent of t " ^\ The compkit variable s can be written as

X =^ ti + Jd}^ with <7 and to the real and imaginary parts, respectively. For convenience, we will sometimes denote the Laplace transform in operator form as ^x(ty\ and denote

the transform relationship between x{t) and X{s) as

^ xir)

X{s).

(9.4)

When s = jw, eq. (9.3) becomes

= KUot)

\ xiOe- J'*'' dt,

(9.5)

which corresponds to the Fourier tran^orm of jc(0; that is,

^COU> =nx{t)l

(9.61

The Laplace transfonn also bears a straighi^forward relationship to the Ftmrier trans-
form when the complex variable s is not purely imaginary. To see this relationship, consider
= + Xis) as specified in eq. (9.3) with j expressed as j tr y(t>, so that

£ X(tr+

= { MD^-^^'-^^^'dt,

(9.7^

'Tie uansfDrmdefiTiedbyeq. {'^3)isi}ficnc3i\tii\hchiIiiteraiL^UiCeiransfotTn, lo distinguish it from
itic ^inilqteral Laplace trdn^fDim^ wliich we <1j'><:iis¨ in Sccnon 9.9. The blJiieral iranslorm in tq. ;9.3> involvts
an integration fmrn it to +¨,, wKJle The unilaicia] transfomi has a fOrmSJldlbir tQ thai in eq (*S-!*>, but with
limit!! nfintegratvnlToatOtn +k. Akwc arepriniari]yc(>ricerocdwiiJi thcbilaieiTdlransform^^t: w]lluniiithe wornd "bilaterql /* exoem where it is needed in Section 93 to avoid uubiguity.

1

¨5È

The Liplace rranstorm

Chap 9

or
r -h-=o

(9,8)

We recognize the right-hand aid* of eq. (9.8) as the Fourier transform of xit)e~^'', thai
is, the LapUce transform of x(t) can be interpreted as the Fourier transform of xiO after multiplication by a real exponential signal. The reaJ exponential e'"^' may be decaying or growing in time^ depending on whether a is positive or negative.
To illustrate the Laplace transform and ics relationship to the Fourier transform, let us consider the following example-
Example 9.
Ltt the iiignal x(.t} - e "'it{0- F^i^ni Example 4.1, the Fourier tranafoini X(jiif') con-
> verges for (T and is given by

J-v

Jo

From eq. (9. J) the L^lace transform is

ycu+a

Jt(j)- [ t-¨^H(r)e"Jr - f f*"^^"^*/;,

or, with s = a + j<o.

f^ 10)

By tompariioii with eq. (9.9) we recognize eq. (9.11) as the Fourier transfortn of
e"^'^"^*'"u(0, and thus,

Xi4r - jui) =

> [ --^ tr + a 0.

{9.12)

= + = fit equivalcntly, since s

tr jto and a

(JU{j},

---- xis) ^

. m^s} > -d.

s+a

That is.

t^ n)

= ^ For example, for a

0+ x(tj i& the unit step with Laplai^ transform X(j)

\h,

{Jkfj} > 0.

We note, in particular, that just as the Fourier transform does not converge for all
signals, the Laplace transform may converge for some values of {R^j} and not for others,
in eq.(^. 13), the Laplace transfoim converges only for cr = (R^jj > -<j. Jftf is positive.

.

Sac. 9.1

Th6 Uplace Transform

657

then Xis) can be cvaJuated at cr = to obtain
~-- X{0 + Jco) =

(9.15)

= As indicated in eq (9,6), for tr

the Laplace transform is equa] to tht Fourier transfoitn,

as is evident in the preceding example by comparing eqs- (9.9) and (915). If o is negativ^e

or zero, the Laplace trajisform still exists, but the Fourier transform does not.

Excimpre 9.2

For comparison with Example 9.1, lei Ubconbider as a second example the sLgna]

jU) = -e "'u^-a

(9,16)

TiieD

X(j) = -I e "'e-"u{-f}dt

(9.17)

- ic
or

-- Jf(j)- |-- .

<9 1S)

+ < < For converg<!nc(r in this e;ian^jle, we require that (JMj ff} 0, or<R*{j} -o; that is,

^ ^e-"'ui-i)

-^,

(R^{s} < -a,

<9.19)

Comptaring eqs. (9.14) and (9.19), we see that the algebraic expression for the

Laplace transform is identical for both of the signals consideied in Examples 9,1 and 9,2,

However, from the same equations, we also see that the set of values of s for which the

expression is valid is very different in the two examples. Ttiis serves to illustrate the fact

that, in specifying the Laplace transform of a signal, both the algebraic expres&ion and

the range of valties of s for which this expression is valid ajie required. In general, the

range of values of s for which the integral in eq.<9.3) converges \% referred to as the region

of convergence (which we abbreviate as ROC) of the Laplace transform. That is, the

ROC consists of those values of j = o- -k- jto for which the Fourier transform of a(/)^"*"

ROC converges. We will have more to &ay about the

as we develop some insight into the

properties of the Laplace transform.

A ROC cottvenient way to display the

is shown in Figure 9.L The variable j is a

complex number, and in the figure we display the complex plane, generally referred to as

the j-plane, associated with this complex vari^le. The coordinate axes are tR¨{j] along

the horizontaJ axis and Sm{s) along (he vertical axis. The hori20rtta] and vertical axes arc

sometimes referred to as the cr-axis and the jw-axis, respectively. The shaded region in

Figure 9.1(a) represents the set of points in ihe s-plane corresponding to the region of

convergence for Example 9. L The shaded region in Figure 9.1(bi indicates the region of

convergence for Example 9.2.

658

iq
a-plane
(R^

T?ie Laplace Transform

Chap. 9

4tm

s-plarie

-a.

(Jl*

{a)

(bj

Ffgure 9. 1 (^} ROC for Example 9 1 ; (b) ROC for Example 9.2.

Example 9.3
In this example, we consiier a signal that is lh¨ sum of t^vu real exponentials:
xU) = ^f-^utt)-2e-^u(i\
The algebraic expresstoti tbr the LaplaK transfarm is then

(920)

Ill- Xis) -

ii(/) - 2d^^^ii(/>U"" ^J

ñ(< -J uiOdT

f 'f""¨(Oi/^

<9C21>

Each uf the integrals in eq. (9.21) is of the smtie form as the integral id eq. (9.10), and
consequentJy. we can use the result in Example 9A to obtain

X(J> = J+ 2

s+ ]'

(9.22)

ROC Tu detennine the

we note that jt^i) is a sum of two real exponentials, and

from eq, (9-21) we sec that X{s) is the sum of the l^place transforms of each of the

individual temi^i. The linit term is the Laplace transform of 3e ^ii(f) and the EeoMvl

term the Laplace tran^iromi of -le~'u(t). From Example 9.1, we knoiv that

I
j+ r

j;

I

s+ 2'

> iR^is]

1,

> ffl*{j} -2.

The set of values of (R*{j} for which the Laplace tiansfonns of both terms converge is
6ie{x} > - 1, and thus, combining ihc two tenns on the rigtit-hand side of eq. (9.2Z), we
obtain

3e"^H(0-2c-'M(O

J- 1

> - (S\^{s}

1.

(^23)

Sec .

3.

1

The Laplace Traj>s:f orm

b 59

Example 9.4
[n this example, we consider a signuL that is the sum of a r^\ and a complex exponenoaL

Using Euler's relation, we can write

2r^^^-M-l;V+

-ñ-

-

j.^-(l.ljJ,,(fj

2

2

and The Laplace transform of x{t) then can be expressed as

Each of the integrals in eq. (9.25 J repiesents a Laplace transfoTm ot the type encountered in Rxample 9. 1. It follows that

^ -- e-^'u{t)

--,
t+ z

m*fj| > -2.

^ -- e ^' '^^'um

YTZryTj, ms) > -1,

(9.26^ (9,27)

For all three Laplace iranafonns to converge simultaneously, we must have (R^{x) > - 1,
Consequently, the Laplace transform of x{D is

or, with terms combined over a common denominator^

In each of the four preceding examples, the Laplace transfomi is raLJonal i.e,, it is a ratio of polynotnials in the complex variable i, so that
where /V(j) and Dix) are the nuitierator polynomial and denominator polynomial, respec-
tively. As suggested by Exaniples 9.3 and 9.4, X{,^) will be rational whenever xit) is a linear combination of real or complex exponentials. As we will see in Section 9.7, rational

--

660

The La;>tace Transform

Chap. 9

(Transforms also arise when we consider LTI systems specified in Lerms of linear constant
coefficient differentia] equations. Except for a scale factor, the numerator and denominatcr polynomials in a rational Lapluce transform can be specified by their roots; thus, nnark-
ROC ing the locations of the roots of Nis) and Z>(.t) in the j-plane and indicating the
provides a convenient piLitorial way of descrlbittg the Laplace transform. For example, in Figure 92(a) we show the j-plane repre.*;entatioTi of the Laplace transform of Example 9..%
with the location of each root ofthedenotninaior polynomial in eq. (9.23) indicated with
"X" and the location of the root of the numerator polynomial in eq. (9.23) indicated witn "o." The corresponding plot of the roots ofthe numerator and denominator polynonriids for the Laplace transform in Example 9.4 is ^iveo in Figure 9.2(b), The region of convergence
for each of these exampli^s is shaded in the corresponding plot.
Sm

s-plane

-2 -li

(R*

(a)
^7H

s-plar>e

-2 -1
i ^ ^
I
X
I
ib)

{R*

Figure 9,2 f-pline representation of ttw Uplaca transforms Iot (a) Example 9.3 and (b) Example 9.4. Each
X in these figures niahts the location
-- oif a pole of the con'esponding Laplace
transform i e.. a root of the denominator Similarly, each o marks a zero I.e., a root ot the the numerator. Ttie shaded regions indicate the ROCs.

For rational Laplace transforms, the roots of the nutnerator polynomial are com-
monly referred to as the zeros of X(j), since, for those values of s. XU) = 0. The roots
of the denommator polynomial are referred to a& the puiex of X(ji\ and for those values of J, X{s) is infinite. The poles and &eros of X{s) in the finite i-plane completely char-
acterize the algebraic expression for X{s) to within a scale factor. The repte mentation of
X(s) through iu poles and zeros in the .t-pUne is referred to as the p^fle-zero plot of XC^).

Sbc. 9,1

The Laplace Transform

661

However, as we saw in Examples 9.1 and 9.2, knowledge of the algebraic form of X(j) does

ROC not by itself identify the

for the Laplace transfomn. That is. a complete specification,

to within a scale factor, of a rational Laplace transform consists of the pole-tero plot of

ROC the transform, together with its

(which i& coimnonly shown as a shaded region in the

j-plane, as in Figures 9.1 and 9.2).

Also, while they arc not needed to specify the algebraic form of a rationaJ transfonn

Xii), it is sometimes convenient to refer to poles or zeros of X(j) at infinity. Specifically,

if the order of the denommator polynomial is greater than the order of ihc numerator poly-

nomial, then S'C^ will become zero as f approaches infimty. Conversely, if the order of the

numeratcir polynomial is greater dian die order of the denominator, then Xis) will become

unbounded as s approaches infinity. This behavtor can be interpreted as leros or poles at

infinity. For e?;ample. the Laplace transform in eq. (9.23) haj* a denominator of order 2 and

a numerator of order only 1, so in this case Xis) has one zero at infinity. The same is true

for the transfomi in eq, (9.30)£ in which the numerator is of order 2 and the denominator is

of order 3. In geneml, if the order of die denominator exceeds the order nf the numerator by k, X(s] will have k zeros at iniit^ity. Similarly* if the order of the numerator exceeds the

order of the denominator by k, X{s) witl have k poles at infinity.

Example 9.5
Let

4

1

x(0 = Hi) - ^^ 'mo + -tf^'uU)-

['^32)

The LapjacE ttansform cf the second and third terms on the right-hand side of cq. \9.32) can be evaluated from Example 9A . The Laplace Iransioim of the unit impulse tan be
evaluated directly as

ROC which is vahd for any vulue of j. Thai is, the

of È-{S{t)} is the entire s^plane. Using

this result, cogcdier wLdi the Laplace transforms of die ottier two terras in eq. (932), we

obtain

or

ROC where the

i s the sfCt yf values of s for wh ich tbt Lapbce tiansfoims cif all three (erms

in jf(f£ converge. The pole-zero plot for this example is shown in Figure 9.3, together with

the RC)C, Also, since the degrees of the numerator and dehominator fif Xis) are equal,

X(s) has neither poles nor zeros at infinity'.

662

The Laplace Tr^nsfcrm

Chap. 9

A-pl^e

<Rt

Figure 9.3 Poie-ZGrD pUit anb ROC i<ir Example 9.5.

Recall ftom eq. (9.6) thai, for s = J<^, the Laplace transferm corresponds to the

ROC Fourier transform. However, if ttie

of the Laplace transform does not include the

= jw-axis^ (i.e., if (R^.!^ 0), then the Fourier transform does not conveige. As we see

frym Figure 9.3, 4-liis, in fact, is the case for Example 9-5> which is con.sistent with the

fact that (he term {]/3)e^u{t) in x(t) does not have a Fourier transform. Note also in this

example that the two zeros in eq, (9.35) occur at the same value of j. In genera], wt will

refer to the ijrtier of a pole or zBto a$ the number of tirue^ it is repe^ed at a given location.

In Example 9.5 there is a second-order zero at j = 1 and two first-order poles, one at

ROC s ^ - 1, the other at :? - 2, Jn this example the

lies to the right of the rightmosi

pole. In general, for rational Laplace transfontis, there is a close relationship between the

locati(^ns of the poles and riie possible ROCs that can be associated with a given pole-zero

ROC plot. Spei;ific constraints on the

are closely associated with time-domain properties

of x{t)' In the next section, we explore some of these constraints and properties.

9.2 THE REGION OF CfOf^ERGEMCE FOR LAPLACE TRANSFORMS

In the preceding section, we saw that a complete speci^cation of d:^^ Laplace tr^nsrom re-

quires not only the algebraic expression for X{s)^ but also the associated region of conver-

gence .

As

e videnc ed

by

Examples 9 . 1

and 9.2, two very different signals

c an

have

identic al

algebraic expressions for XC^), so that their Laplace transfornis are distiivguishable onlyhy

the region of convergence. In this section, we explore some specific constraints on the RCX?

for various classes of signals. As we will see, an understanding of these constraints often

ROC permits us to specify implicitly or to reconstruct the

from knowledge of only the al-

gebraic expression for X(s) and certain general characteristics of Mt) in the time domain.

ROC Property 1: The

of X(j) consists of strips parallel to the jw-axis in the j-plane.

ROC The validity of this pTopeity stems from the fact that the

t?f Xts^ consists of

= those values af s tr + j(ti for which the Fourier transform of x{f)e^^^ converges. That

Sec. 9.2

The Reg f on of Converaence for Laplace Transforois

6¨J

ROC is, the

of the Laplatx transform of lit) consists of those values of j for which x{t)e

IS absolutely integrabU:^

[ < IxCOk ''' rf^

£,

(936}

Propeit)^ 1 then follows, since this condition depends only on ff, tKe leal part ois.

ROC Property 2: For rational Laplace cransfonnsi the

does noC contain any poles

Property 2 is easily observed in all the e;tamp]es studied thus far. Since JIffj) is iiifinite
ROC at a pok, the integral in eq. (9.3) clearly docs not converge av a pole, and thus the
c^innot contain values -of j that are poles.

ROC Property 5: If j(/> is of finite duiation and h absolutely integrable, then the

is

theenliri& j-p]^ne.

The intuition hehitKJ this resuli is suggested in Figures 9.4 and 9.5. SpecificaJly, a
finite-duration signal has the property that it Ls zero outside an interval of tiuite duration,
aft illustrated in Figure 9A. In Figure 9.5(a), we have shown xU) of Figure 9.4 mulriplied
by a decaying exponential, and in Figure 9.5(b) the same signal multiplied by a growing

Decaying exporentiaf

'2 * Figure 9,4 Rnite-dij ration signal. Gfowing exponentia!

taJ

(bi

Figure 9*5 (a) Fnitfr-dti ration signal of FlQLre 9.4 multiplifld by a decaying exponer lial; (b) (inite-dtiration signal of FiflUT* 9.4 muttipHed t^ a growing eifponeTitial.

^FMt a more (twrmigh Mini foiriMi^ treatinenl of Laplace transforms and ttierr mathematica] pfupertie*,

incliMJtng convergcnct, see E D. RaJn^iUc, The LapUtcf Trans/onn: An !njniduttufn (New York, MiCniih

W ^cw R laji, ]963>, and

V. Chiiirhill and J.

Brown, CompUj: Vatinhlfs and Applkations f5th ftd.j

Y4>fk:

IWOV McGraw-Hill,

N^iite that thft cmutttiun of ELb^£lule Imcgrabilily i^ one of (ht Duiijhlcl CDnditinn.s iniro-

duced in Section 4 T in the coiKe^L of our discussion of the convergence of Fourier transforms..

.

664

Ths Laplace Transform

Chap. 9

expoo&ntia]. Since the interval over which x[t) is nonzero is finite, the exponential weighting is never unbounded, and consequently, it is re^onable that the integrabiMty of x(t) not be destroyed by this exponential weighting,
A more formal verification of Prcperty 3 is as follows: Suppose that x{r) is absolutely
integrable, so that

< |j:(0]i^f £.

(9M)

= For J i7 + ^<t> to be in the ROC, we require that x{t) ^' be absolutely integrable. i.e..

< |jt(r)k"^' dt ¨.
I.

(^.38)

ROC > Eq. f9.37) verifies that s is in the

when (R^{s} = <t = ^. For cr 0. the maximum

value

of f^~^^

over

ti?e

interval

on

which

xit)

is

nonzero

is

^"""^i ,

and

thus

we

can

write

-r-.

di< \x{r)\e~'''

-o-r.

e

[ ^^\x{t)\dr

JT,

(9.39)

Since the right-hand side of eqA9.39) is bounded, so is the left-hand side; therefore, the
> j'plane for (R^{s} O must also be in the ROC. By a similar argument, if tr < 0, then

-7n

< \xiT)\e-''' dt

-rrT> e

U(OUr,

JT,

JJ\

(^.40)

ROC and again, .\it)e~^' is absolutely integrable. Thus, the

includes the entire j-plane.

Example 9.6
Let
Then

- Jc{f)
0.

0<f <7
otherwise

OAi)

'e-''dr =

-* 1 [1

-^^+^)^
1.

In

^+a

(9.42)

ROC Since in this example x{i) is of finite length, it foUowy from Property 3 that the

is

Ihccntircj-pluncrlnlheformof eq. (9.42), X(j) would appear to have a pole at s = -a,

ROC which, frym Property 2, would be irn^nsistent with an

that corisLsts of The entire

.v-planc. In fact, however, in the algebraic expression in eq. (9.42)^ both numerator and
tlerivminatwr ore lert^ al r -= a, and thus, to dete^rmine X(s) at j = --a, we can use

L' h5pi tariff rule loobtain

-- lirft y{s\

lim Jv

= lim Te ''^e '-^

so that

X(-a) = T.

i^A3)

Sec. 9.2

d Th^ Ragion Converg^nod for Laplace Transforms

665

St is iTTiptJitaTit to recognize that, to ensure that the exponential weighting Ls bounded over the interval in which x(t) is nanzero, the preceding discussion relies heavily on the
fact that Ail) is of finite duration- In the next two properties^ we consider modification.s of ihe result in Property 3 when x{t) is of finite extent in only the positive-time or negative-
time direction.
^ Property 4: If Mt) is fight sided, and if the line tflie{.y} tr^ is in the ROC, then all
> values of J for which cR-et?} cTf, will also be in the ROC.

A = ri^hr-suJeJ .^igaal is -^ signal for which jf(r)

prior to some finite time T[, is

illustrated in Figure 9.6. It is possible that^ for such a signal, there is no value of jfor whith

the Laplaee transform will converge. One example is the signal x(t) = e'' tt(f ), However^

suppose thai the Laplace traru^fomi converges for some value of cr, which we denote by

ffo Then

{9.U)

or equivalentty, since x{0 is right sided.

(9.45)

FFgtire 9.6 RIght-sJded signal.

-- Thien if o-] > o-q, it must also be true that x:(t}e "'i^ is absolutely integrable, since È ^'^
decays faster than e~*''^' as t ^ +£, as illustrated in Figure 9.7, Formally^ we can say

> That v;iih<T^i

ctj}.

(tTi -traiJi

"^^^dt.

(9.46)

m Since T, is finite, it follows from eq. (9.45) that the right side of the inequality eq. (9.46)

is finite, and hence^ x{t^e~^*^ is absolutely integrable*

Note that in the preceding argyment we explicitly rely on the fact that x{t) is right

> ^ sided, so that, although with cri

<r^, ^-^if <liverges faster than e~^"^ as j

-- qd,

xit)e~^^^ cannot grow without bound in the negative-time direction, since x{t) = for

666

The Laplace Transform

Cha^. 9

Figure 9.7 If x{l) is right wAwi

and x{t)e-'^* is absolJtely intftgrable^

> tt^enJr(0fi"'^^ff1

pd. w^Ha'sobe

^ ateolutel/ integrate,

< ROC, /

T"] .

Also^

in

this

case,

if a

poitiL

j

is

in

the

then all the points to the right of j,

ROC i.e., all points with larger real parts, arc in the ROC. For this reason, the

in ihi^ case

]È commonly referred to as a right kaifplane.

= Property S: If xit} is left sided, and if the line <R^s) ^o is it£ the ROC. then all values of s for which 6{^{i} < tro will also be in the ROC,

A left-sided signal is a signal for which x{t) = after seme finite time T^, as illus-

trated in Figure 9.8* The argument and intuition behind this property arc exactly analogous

ROC to the argument and intuition behind Property 4. Also, for a lefL-sided signal, the

is

commonly referred to as a ieft-hcdfplane, as if a point j is in the ROC, then aJl points to

the left of J are in the ROC.

Figure 9.8 Lsft'Sided signal.

= Property 6: If x{t) is two sided, and if the line(R^j) ctq is in the ROC, then the ROC = will consist of a strip in the s-plane that includes the line (R¨{s} cto.

A > < twa-sided signal is a signal that is of infinite extent for both r

and / 0, as

ROC illustrated in Figure 9.9(a). For such a signal, the

can be examine** by choosing an

arbitrary time Tij and dividing x{i) into the sum of a right-sided signal Xf((t) mid a left-

sided signal xtii), as indicated in Figures 9.9(b> and 9.9<c). The Laplace transform of x{t)

converges for values of j for which the transforms ^fboth XR{t\ and xiJj) converge. From

ROC > Property 4, the

of je{jc/^(r)} consists of a half-plane (R¨{j} a-ft for some value tr^,

ROC < and from Property 5, the

ofÈ\xi{t)) consists of a half-plane (R^*^ rrt for sotne

ROC value <Ti^. The

of J&fj:(f>} is then the overlap of these two half-plaries. as indicated in

< Figure 9.10, This assumes, of course, that tru tri, so that there is some overlap. If this

is not the case, then even if ihe Laplace transforms of Xti{t) and x^it) individually exist,

the Laplace transform of x{t) does not.

Sflc. 9.2

The Region of Convergence for Laplace Transforms

6¨7

^R^£)

-L^t)

(b)

M

Figure 9.9 Two-sided ^naJ tlividcd into the sum of a dgtit-sUled ind lett-sid&tl stg^

> nai: (a) two-sJ4ed signat x{t): (b) tt]¨ rJaM-sided signal equal to x(0 for f

To and

< < equal to for r Fq; (c) the left-sided signal equal to x{t) tor r Tq and equal (o for

^7

i^fi

(H>

la)
^m -31^

It^L

tH.

CTf

IffL

(R^

{b]

(c)

Ffgjre ^.10 ta} ROC for x>?(0 in Figure 9.9; (bl ROC for Xi[t) in Fjgure

^ 9.9; ^c) the ROC for x(i)

Xff{t) + mit), assjminff that the ROCs in (a) and

(b) ovflflap

668

Jhe Laplace Transfomi

Chap. 9

Exam pre 9.7

Let

s(t} = e-^\

(9.47)

^ b>0 illustrated in Figure 9.11 for both

and b<0. Since thi^ is a two- ^id^ signal.

sum Let lis divide it into the

{)f a [ig.ht-sidÈd and left-btded signal; that is.

;Ë{0

=

f

bi tf(r)

+

f ^+>""."M-rX

(9.4B)

-b|ti

> ÈK = Figure 9.1 1 SJgnal x{t)

fl-^ff for botfl i?

arxJ

0.

FitimExaiii|jle9,l,

and from E)caII^))e 9.2,

5+&

(9,49)

(9.50)

Although thjc Ldplace tiansfonns of each of the individual terms in eq. (9.43) have a
Ttgion of convergence, there is no commOft region of convergence if i^ ^ 0, aad thus,
> for those values oft, x(0 ha^ no Laplace tiansfonn. If ^ 0, the Laplace transform cf
x{i) is

,-M

1

+ j

fr

I
s -b

-2b s^ - b^ ,

-fc<(R*{j}< +ii.

(9.51)

"Hie corresponding pole-zero plot is shown in Figure 9.12, with the shading indicating the ROC.

1

Sec. 9.2

Trw Region of Convergence for Laplace TransfinTn&

tfm
I I
J-

B-plane CRn

669

Figure 9.TZ Pole-zero plot and HOC for Example 9.7

A signaJ either does noi have a Laplace transform or falls into one of the four cate-

gories covered by Properties 3 through 6. Thus, for any signal with a Laplace transform,

ROC the

must be the entire j-plane (for finite-length signals), a left-half plane (for lefi-

sided signals), a righi-half plane (for right-sided signals|, or a single strip (for two-sided

ROC signals ) . In all the examples that we have considered, the

has the addit ional property

that in each direction (i.e.t (R^j} increasing and (H¨{.t} decreasing) it is bounded h\ poles.

or exten^ls to itiilnity. Li fact, this is always true for rational Laplace transforms:

ROC Property?; If the Laplace transform Jf(s) of ^0) is rational, then its

is bounded !

by poles or extends to infinity. In addition, do poles ofX(s) are contained in the ROC. j

A formal argument establishing this property is somewhat involved, but iis validity

is essentially a consequence of the facts that a signal with a rational Laplace transfonr^

con:iists of a linear combin^oo of exponentials and* from Examples 9.1 and 9.2, that

ROC the

for the transfoim of Individual terms in this linear combination must have the

property. As a consequence of Property 7, together with Properties 4 and 5, we have

Property ft; If the Laplace transform Xis) of xO) is rational^ then if jc(f) is right sided,

ROC the

is the negion in the j-plane to the right ofthe rightmost pole If Mr) is left sided,

ROC the

is the region in the :f-plane to the left of the leftmost pole.

._^, J

To illustrate how different ROCs can be associated with the same pole-zero pattern,
let us consider the following example:

Exampfe 9.8

Let

X<s) =

1

(s + V}(s + 2y

C?..^^)

with the associated pole-z^ro paitem in Figure 9. 3(,a), As indicated in t-"igureb 9. 1 Mb]-

(d), there are three possible ROCs that can be associated ^ith this algebraic expression,

corresponding to three distinct signals. The signal associated with the pole-zero pat-

ROC tern in Figure 9.13(b) is right sided. Since the

tnclude.>; the jm-^xis^ the Foiiner

670

-x-x-

s-plane
(H.

Trte Laplace TransJorm

Chap. 9

^m
S'pian&

-X-X-
m.

(a)

ft))

Sw
s-plane

I I I \ I
*cl

m,

^nv

I I

I

I

i

I

t

I

-x-x-

I

I

I

I

t

I

I

I

I

I

fdt

a-plarw
(R.

9J Frgure

3 (a) Pole-zero pattern for Exampte 9.8; (bj ROC comesportding

to a Tight-sided s^uenc^; (c) RDC corresponding to a lett-sjded setfucnce;
b (d) ROC corresponding a two-sided sequence.

transform of tliji signal converges. Figure 9- 13(t) corrts^ponds to a left-sided signal and

Figtire 9, 13(d) to a two-sided signal- Neilber of these iwo signals have Fourier trans-

RQCs fornis, sitice their

do not include the ^cu-aKis.

9.S THE INVERSE LAPlACB TRAISJSFORM

Iti S^ctiOTi 9-1 we discussed tb& interpretation of the Laplace transfortn of a signal as the
Fourier transform of an exponentially weighted version of the signal ; that is, with s ex-
pressed as s = rr ^ jtsi, the Laplace transform of a signal x{i) is

'I Xi<T\ j(Mi} - ^{xit)e-^'} =

-ITf^-Jitl
xiOe

dr

(9.53}

for values of s = ff + jw intlve ROC. We cat^ invert this relationship using the inverse

We Fourier trans fDrm as given in eq^ (4,9),

have

£) ^\ j:(fy ^' =^ ff-'{X(cr +

^

X(iT + £^>^Vo>,

(9.54)

or, multiplying both sides by ^^^ we obtain
;t(tr + >W*^-^>"'Vw.
I'TT

(955:

1

Sec. 9.3

The Inverse Lapiace Transform

*7

Thill is, we can recover xiji from its Laplace transform evaluuted for a set of valuer of
s = c7 + ;a> in the ROC, with tr fixed and w varying from -^ lo +=c^ We can highlight
this and gain additional insight Lnio retx>vering xir) from X{s) by changing the variable t)^ integration in eq. (9.55) from <ti to ^ and using rhe fact thattr is constant, sothatc/j ^ jdii)
Tlie result is the basic inverse Lapiace transform equation:

-- xU) = -

-nr-i-j-
X{s)e''ds

Zttj

(9.S6^

This equation states that x{t) can be represented asi a weighted integral ot ciirnplex

exponentials. The contour of integration in eq. (9.56) is the straight line in the i-plane

= cnires ponding to alt points s satisfying (ft^{i}

tr. This iine is parallel to tlie ;t*>-a)tis.

-- ROC Furthermore, we can choose any such Une in the

i,e,T w^ can chiMJse any value

of o- such that Xi(T -H jtii) converges. The formal ^vaJuation of the integral for a general

X{s) requires the use of cotiLour iategiation in the complex plane, a topic that we will nnt

consider here. However, for the class of rational transforms, the inveree Laplat-e transform

c;tii be determined without direcdy evalunting eq. (9^56) by using the technique of partial-

fraction expansion in a manner similar to that used Ln Chapter 4 to determine the inverse

Fourier transform. Basically, the procedure consists of expanding the rationul algebraic

expressi^m into a line<tr combination of lower order terms.

For example, a,ssuming no multiple-order poles, and assuming that the order of the
denominator polynomial is greater than the order of the numerator polynomial, we can

expand X{s) in the form

y X{s)=

-^^--^.

^57 J

ROC ROC From the

of A'(Oh the

of each of the individual terms in eq i9 57) tran be

inferred, and then, from Examples 9. 1 and 9 2, the inverse Laplace transform of each of

these terms can be determined. Tlicre are two possible choices for the inverse transform

ROC of each term Ajis -^a,)m the equation. If the

= is to the right of the pole at s

-a,.

ROC then the inverse transtbitn of this term is Aj ^ ^''u(Ot '^ right-sided signal If the

is to

= the left of the pole at s

-Oi, then the inverse transform of the term is -Aj^~' ""ut 7i,

a left-sided signal. Aclding the inverse transforms of the individual terras in eq. (9.57)

then yields the inverse transform of Xis)^ The details of ibis procedure are best presented

through a number of examples.

Ex^mpJe 9.9

Let

f^ + l)fv + 2)

To obtain the inverse Laplace transfonnn we first perform a partial-fractiun expansiiu to
obtain

X{!) -

---- I

-- -r A + --^R--

(j-f- l)(j-h2)

+ J + 1

s2

f^.-Yf?!

672

The Upiac^e Transform

Chap. 9

As dibcDssed in the ^ppeodix, we can evaluate the coefficients A and B by muJTiplying + both sides of eq. (9.59) by (s l}(s + 2} and then equating coefficients of equal powers
of J on both sides. Aitematively, we can use the relation

(9.60)
(9.6n

Thus, the partial-fraction expansion for X(J> is

M ^''^ =--

- r^r

(9 62^

From Examples 9.1 and 9.2, we know thtu there arc two possible inverse trani-

ROC foims foT a transibrm of the fomn M{.t ^ a)^ dtpendiog on whether the

js to the

ROC ieft or the ri^ht nf the pole. Conjseqtieutly, we need lo deternuDe which

to associate

wiib each of the mdWiiual first-order ti?rtiis in eq. (9.62). This is done by reference to the

ROC ROC picpeTiieAcifih*

developed in Section 9.2. Since the

> for jtU) is <R^{jf

-1,

ROC m the

for the i ndi vidual terms the putial-fraction expaasio n uf eq . <9 ,62) includts

> (R¨{.t} " i , The RCXT for each term can then be eitterided to the left or right (or both) to

be bounded by a pole or inhnity. Tliis is illustrated in Figure 9,14. Figure ^.14(a) shows

ROC the pole-zero plot and

for X{s) , as specified in eq , i9

5 &),

Figuit '5 1 4(b) .

and 9 . 1 4( c>

ROC represent the individual tetms in the partifli-fraction evpansJon in eq. (9.62). The

for the sum isindicated with lighter shading. Fnrtiie term represented by Figure 9.14(c},

ROC the

for the sun\ can be t^tended to Vhe left a^ shovn, so that it is bounded b> a poie.

s-plane

^rtl

s-plaoa

I
^

-1

iS\^

-2

s-plan£ (R^

(tsj

i^)

Figure 9.T4 Gonstrudjon olthe ROCs imtha individual terms in \Y\i

partiaJ-fraction expansion of X{s] in Example 9.8: (a) poi&-zero plot and ROC

= k = for X{$): (13) pole at J

-l and Its flOC; (c) pole s

-2 aixl its ROC,

:

1

.

Sec. 9.3

The Inverse Laplace Trartsfofin

673

ROC 5inec the

is to the right ot both poleR, the ^amc is true for each of the indi-

vidual lerTTs <^^tE^T] bt secTi in Figures 9,14Cb) and fc>. Conse<iucnt|y, from Property 8
in the preceding set;tit>n, we kno^ thut each of these (erm^ corresponds u* a righi-i^ided

signal. The inverse transform of (he individutil lerm& in eq. (9.62) can (hen be ob(aiiie^

by

re fciente

lo

Example

9 .

i

-- e 'ait) H £

,

J+ 1

> {R^.v}

1

{R^r}> 2.

f9.64)

We thus obtatii

" U^-e ='}wrO

+ + (j

I |\(J

2)

lR^^} > - 1.

f9.65)

Example 9. TO

Let us n<tw suppose that the ulgebraic e^tpres^ion for Xis) is agajn given by eq. {9 5S),

ROC but that the

is now the left-half plane CR*{j} < --2. The partial -fraction expansion

for Kis') relateb only (o the algebraic sKpression^ so eq. (9.62) is still valid. With this new

ROC ROC, however, the

is to the left of both poles and thus, the same tnust be true for

ROC eufh of the two terras in the equation. That is^ the

fftr the term corresponding to

- < ROC the pole at J ^

1 js (R-^.f}

1

,

while

the

for the term with pole at j = - 2 is

i3t*{\} < -2. Then, fmm Fxample 9,2,

--È
-e 'ii{-i\ *. ^

I
-,

s -t- 1

-- -f ^ui-i-] J^-^ !--,

CR^jr} < - 1,
-X CH^{j} <-

(9.66) (9.67)

so that

^ xii) = [-f ' + f -']u(-0

^ ,\ 2 ^^.. ,
,\s -I- 1 )J.t -1-

< Cfti^M

2.

(9.68)

Exampfe 9, T T

ROC < Finally, suppose that the

-2 < of ^(j) in eq. (9.5S) i^

{R*{j}

- L. In this case,

ROC the

= IS to the left of the poJe at.f

1

s(* that this terni corresponds to the left-sided

ROC stgnalineq. (9.66), while the

-2 is to the right of (he pole at j =

so that this term

corresponds to the right-sided signal in eq. (9.&4), Combining these, we hnd that

^ xit) ^ -e V-O-t'--^¨(0

rt*T"rrtWf\'S ^+^ZVJ -2<^*(J}< -1

^9.69)

As discussed in the appendix, wheti X(i) has multiple-order poles, or when the de-
noniitiator is not of higher degree than the numerator, the partial -fraction expansion of X(j)
m will include other terms in addition to the first-order terras considered Examples 99-
9. 1 L In Section 9,5, after discussing properties of the Laplace transfotm, we develop sortie
other Laplace transform pairs that, iti conjunction with the properties, allow us lo extend the inverse transform method outlined in Exatnple ^.9 to arbitrary rational transfDrms,

674

The Liplace Transform

Chap. 9

9.4 GEOMETRIC EVALUATION OF THE FOURfER TRANSFORM FROM THE POLE-ZERO PLOT
As we saw in Section 9.1, the Fourier transform of a signal is the Laplace transform evalu-
ated on the jw-axis. In tbis section v/e discuss aprocedure for geometricallv evaluating the Fourier transform and, more generally, the Laplace transfonn at any seL (if vaJues from the pole-zero pattern associated witii a rational Laplace transfonn. To develop ttie procedurs,
bl us first c&nsider a Laplace iransfonn with a Jiingle zero [i.e., Kis) = s -- a\ which we evaluate at a specific value t>f s, say, j = jj , The algebraic expression 5| -- a is (he sum
of two complex numbers, X] and -a. each of x^^hich can bt represented as a vector in die complex plane, as illustrated in Figure 9.15. The veclor representing the complex number
il -- ais then the vector sum of St and --a, which we see in the figiare to be a vector from
= the zero at .v a to the point ii . The vaJue ofXis 1 1 then has a magnitude that is the length
of this vector and an angle that is the angle of the vector relative tu the real -axis. If Jt(j:)
instead has a single pole at j - a [i.e., Xis) = \/{s- - a}], then die denominator would be T^presenVed b> the same vector sum of S\ and -a, and the value of X{s^) would have a magnitude that is Ihe reciprocal of the length of the vector frorn the pole to ^ = si and an
angle that is the negative of the angle of the vector with the real axis.

Ï "Jl

s-p4arie 5l

/ ^ a m¨

Figure 9.15 Complex plane representatTon of 1h¨ '^rectOTS £i, a, and
d - a nepresentjng the complex num-
bers Sj. a, and si - a. respectively.
A more general rational Laplace transfOTm consists of a product of pole and zej£
terms of the form discussed in the preceding paragraph; that is, it can be factored into die form

XU) = M

(9,70)

To evaluate X(i> at 5 '= S|, each term in the product is represented by a vector from the
b i^ero or pole to the point S[. The magnitude of A:(j]) then the magnitude of the scale
fact<fr A/, times the product of die lengths of the aero vectors (i.e., the vectors from the zeros to .P| ) divided by the product of the lengths of the pole vectors (Le , the vectors from
the poles to s{\. The angle of the complex number A: (ji ) is the sum of the angles of the zero vectors minus the sum of the angl&s of the pole vectors. If die scale factor Af in eq. (9 70)
is negative, an additional angle of it would be included. If X[s) has a multiple pole or zero

2

Sec 9_4

Geomatric Evaluation of the Fourier Transform from the Pole-Zero Plot

i75

(or both), tyrrespondir^g to some of the a^ 'a being cqu^l to each other or SL>me of ibe ^, '^ bein^ equal to each other (or both), the l&ngths and angles of the vectors from eath ot these poles or zeros must be mclutled a number of times equa^ to the order of the pole or zero,

Exampfe 9. 1

Let

-- X(i1 =

-r.

(R^s}> --.

C^71)

Ttw Fourier iranst'orm is X{_s')\^^^^ For this example, then, ihc Fourier transform is;

> XC;^) = - I + 1/2

f5.72)

The pole-zerf> plot for X(j) is '.bown ir Figure 9.16. To determine Ihe Fourier iransfftrm graphically, we construtt the pole vector as indicated. The magnitude of the Fourier
transform ^t frequency w is the Jeciprocal of the length oflhc vector fTOm the pok to the
|K>Lnl jot on tbe I magi nary ax is.. The phase of the Fourier tran Rfomi i s i he n^gati ve of the
angle of the vector. GeorrielritaUy, from Figure 9.1^^ \ve can wriie

|Xf>lf - ^^ + fl/2)^

Cy.73)

and

<yOti>) - -(an"'2w.

c9 74)

3-plane

Figure 9.16 Pole-zero plot tor Example 9.12. |X(^i)| 1$ the re;;iproc5l or
Ihe length of ;he vector shown, and <X{l<a) is the negative of the angle of the vector
Often, pan of Ihe value of the geomclrit determination t£f the Fourier Lrarsform I ies. in its U!icfulne!^^ in obtainuig un appiyj^lmate view of the overall charactei-jstits of the trar^form. For example, in Figure 9.16. it is readily evident thai the length of the pole vector monotonically increases with increasing w, and thus, the magnitude of the Fourier

676

The LapVace Transform

Chap. 9

transform will monotonitally decrease with increasing w. The ^ility to draw genei^al couolusions about the behavior of the Fourier transform from the pole-^ero plot is further IN liLKtrated by &. consideration of general first- and second-order systems.

9,4.1 First-Order Systems
As a generalization of Example 9.12. let us consider the class of first-order systems that was discussed in Sdme detail in Section 65, 1 The impulse response for ^uch a sysTem is

and its Laplace transfoTm i^^

] ,-J/t.
T

(9.75i

TT + ]'

3{4v}> --.

\9 76)

The poie-zeroplot is shovfn in Figure9T7, Note from the figure that the length of the pole

w ^0 vector is minimal for

and increases

monoionically

as

w i

Lncre^ises.

A.lso,

the angle

of the pole intreases monotonically fn>m to tt/I as ^ increases from to ^.

&m
s -plane

^,
Figure 9. } 7 Pole-rero plot tar firstcrder system of &q. i9 76).
Froni the behavior of the pole vector as q) varies, it is clear thai the magnitude of
^ the frequency nesponse Myjoj) monotonically decreases m increases, while <.Hijw)
monotonically decreases from to -it/2, as shown in the Bade plots ffir thi^ syj^leni in
Figure 9-lR, Nwte also thai when cu ^ 1/t> the real and imagitiary pans of the pole vector
are equal, yielding a_ value of the jnagnitude of the freijuency respOTise that is reduced by
a factor of v^, or approximately ^ dB, from its maHimum 3Lt oi = and a value of irJi for
the angle of the frequency response. This is cunsisient with our eAanunation of hrst-crder
w systems in Section 6.5.1. where we nijted that = \fr is often referred tn a.v the 3-dB
-- point or the break frequency i.e., the frequency at which the straight-line y^pprnximation
of the Bode plot of \H{jut)\ has a break in its slope. As we also saw in Section 6.5.1, the time constant r controls the speed of response of first-order systems, and we now ^cc that

Sec. 9.^

Gfloinetric Ei^aluation of the Fourier Transform from the Pole-Zero Plot

?0
X
i
^ -40

3dB

Asymptotic ' approjtimation

60

C1/T

1/t

1Q/T

100/t

677

tt/4
- uZ-fl
tt/2

Asymptotic approximation

3ti/4

Cl/T

1/t

IC/t

lOQ/T

Figure 9. T 8 Frequeiicy response

for a fir^t-order system.

-- the pole of such a system at j = l/r is on the negative reaJ axis, at a distance to the
origin that is the reciprocal of the time constant.
From our graphical interpretation, we can alsf) see how changing the time constant
or, equivalently, the position of the polcof H(:t) changes the characteristics of afirst-Lrder system. In particular, as the pole moves farther into the left-half plane, the bieak frequency and, hence, the effective cutoff frequency of the system increases. Alsti, from eq. (9.75)
and from Figure 6. 19, we see that this same movecnent of the pok to the left corresponds
to a decrease in the time constant t, resulting in a faster decay of the impulse response and a correspondingly faster rise time in the step response. This relationship hetween the real part ftf the pole locations and the speed of the system response holds more generally;
that is, poles farther away frorn the /w-axis are associated with faster response terms in
the impulse response.

9,4.2 Second-Order Systems
Let UK ncKt consider the cla5S of second-order systems, which was discussed in sume detail in Section 6.5.2. The impulse response and frequency response for the system, originally

678
given in eqs, (6,37) and (6,33i, respectively, are

Ttie Laplace Transform

Chap. 9

where

= r\

- -l(i},, -\-bi,,J^'^

I,

aij
2,;'?":: 1

-- //(ji^) = _._-^

i!^^.^^^

_.

The Lapiace irafiKform of thti impulse response is

(9.78)

> For ^ K fi and c^ are real and thus boih poles lie on the real axis, as Lmiicated
in Figure 9.19(a). The (;ase of I :> 1 is essentially a product of two tir\t-order terms, us in Sectiyn 9AA. Consequently, in this case '|H(;ti>)| decreaiies monorcnically as \ii>\ in-
creases, whik -^fHjto) varies from at w ^ to --fr ^s w --+ £ This can be verified

frÈ>m Figure 9.19(a) by observing ihat the iengLh of the vector from each of the twu poles

= to the point .<;

Ju} increases monolonjcally as iit iiit;reases froiti I), and the angle of each

of these vectors increases from to v/l as to increases from to ^. Note aho that as { increase?, one pole moves closer to the jw-axis, indicative of a temi in the impulse re-

sponse that decays more slowly, and the other pole moves farther into the left-half plane^

indiciitive of a term in the impulse response that decayi; more rapidly. Thus, for large val-

ues of ^, it is the pole dose to the Jo>-<ixis that domitiates ttie system response fur large

time. Similarly, from a ccnstd^ation of the pole vectors for ^ ::?^ 1 , as indicated in Figure 9. 19(b), for low frequencies the length and angle of the vector for the pole close to
w the jt2i-2xis are much naore ijensitive to changes in than the length and angle t>f che

vector fyr the pole f^r from the jV-iwis. Hence, we see that for low frequencies, the char-

acteristics of the frequency response are influenced principally by the pole close to the

/w-axis, Foi

< < È^ K ci and tr^ are complex, so thai ihe pole-zero plot is that shown in

Figure 9.19(c). Coiresporidingly, the impulse re^ponsa and step response have oscilla-

We tory partK,

note *hat the twt) poleif occur in complex conjugate locations. In fact, as

we disÈUfis in Section ^,5.5, the complex |>alÈ^s ^and seros) for a real-vaiued signul al-
-- ways occur in t:ottiplex conjugate pairs. From the figure particul^ly when ( is small,

so that the poles are clojjc to the ^'w-axis^as to approaches ut^/] - ^^, the behavior of

the frequency response is domijiated by the pole vector in the second quadrant, and in

Sec. 9.4

Gefimetric Evaluaftion of the Fourier Transform from the Pole-Zero Plot

^tn s-p(ane

3m
s -plane

2w,vt'-1

-^-£,

<R^

<fl^

679

(a;

(b)

^n*

&- plane

V
^.
t^,

>
CDS ft =^ CR^

(c)

¨fl

> Figure 9.t9 [a) Pole-?ero plotter a second-order system with f 1; (b) pole vec-

< tors for ^ .:^ 1; (t) pole-zem plot for a secqnd-order system with

^ ^ 1; (d) pole

< < = vectors 'or

f 1 and for aj = ^j^^/l - i^ and ¨

Ý ^nv^T- ^2'

s'to,,.

680

Tf?e Laplace Transform

Chap. 9

particular, the Jength of that pole vector has a minimum at op = w,,Vl - ^^ Thu<i, qualitatively, wc would expect the magoJtUiic of the frequency response to exhibit a pe^
in the vicinity of that frequency. Because of the presence of the other pole, the peak
A will occur not exactly dt-to = <a,,J\ - ^^, but ai a frequency slightly less than this.
careful sketch of the magnitude of the frequency i^sponse is shown in Figure ^ 20(a)
m foi a),, = 1 and several values of ^ where the expected behavior the vicinity of the
poles is clearly evident. This is consistent with our analysis of second-order systems in
Section 6.5.2,

iHtj4^) t = 0.1
^ ^=o.r>
; = 0-2'"^
\^
\w -1 -TT
lb:
Figure 9.^0 (a) Magnitude and {b) phase of the- frequency response for a
secorrd- order sysfem with =" f ^- 1.

Sec 9.4

Geometric Eva^lJa'Jon of the Founer Transform from the Pofe-Zero Plot

661

< < Thus, for

( 1 , the second-order sy.stem is a nonideal bandpass tUter, with Lhe

parameter ^ controlling the sharpTiess and ^^vdth of ihc peak in the frequency response. In

particular^ from the geometry in Figure 9.19(d), we see that the length "f the pole vector from th e second-qLiadrant pole increases by a factor of Jl from its minimum at Èi> -
^Ft v' 1 ^ f ^ when oj increases or decreases froni this value by ^"w^,. Consequently, ft>r small
^£^d neglecting thceffec[ of" the distant third-quadrant pole, \II{jw){ is within a factor of

v^2 of its peak value over the frequency ranue

- - < < + <v^¨ v'" I

-f ^

^tdri

cj

tu,, J^ - ^^ ^lOti

B If Vifc define the ret<illve bandwidth ^s the length of this frequency interval divided by
the undamped natural frequency w,,^ we see that

B = U.

Thus, the closer ^ is to j^ero, the .^harper and narrower the peak in the frequency response
B Q i.^; Note also that is the reciprocal of the quality rneasuie for second-order sysienis

defined in Section 6.5.2, Thus^ as the quality increases, the relative bandwidth decreases

and the filter becomes incre^Lsingly frequency selective.
An analogous picture can be developed for <//(ft>), which is plotted in Figure 9.2fKb)

for (i},, =^ 1 and several values of ^. As can be ^een frojn Figure 9.19(d^, the angle of

the second-quadrani pole vector changes from -^/4 to to 7r/4 a^ ^ changes from

~ ~ ¨>ft V 1

r^

^iwpj to Wpi^^'l - ^^ tt) Jy tiia - ^^ H- ^w,,. For ^mall valuer of ^, the angle

for the thiTd-t^uadrant pole changes very little i>ver this frequency internal, resulting in

a I'apid change in -i^NiJiit) of approximately tt/2 over the interval, ^a captured in the

figure.

-- Varying ^r, with f fixed only changes the frequency scale in the preceding
discussion i.e.. |H(iL£)| and <H{fo) depend only on W^w^. From Figure 9.l9{c), we

also can readily determine how the poles and system charactenstics change as we vary

^, keeping w,/ constant. Since cosfl = ^, the poles rrove along a semicircle with fixed

= radius nf,,. For ^

0, the two poles are on the imaginary aids. Correspondingly, in the

time domain, the impulse response is .%inusoJdal with no damping. As ^ increases from

K to the two poles remain complex and move into the left-half plane, and the vectors

from the ongin to the poles maintain a constant overall magnitude (ii,,. As the real part of the poles becomes more negative, the a.ssociated time response will decay more <iuickly as i ^^ ¨. Also, as we have seen, as ^ increases from toward 1, the relative bandwidth of the frequency response increases, and the frequericy le.^ponse becomes less sharp and

less frequency stlectivc.

9.4.3 AU-PaSi Systems
As a final illustration of the geometric evaluation of the fiequency response, let us con-
sider a system for which the Laplace transform of rtie impulse response has the polc-ieir* plot shown in Figure 9.21(a). From thi.^ figure, it is evident that for any point along lhe >aj-axis, the pole and zero vectors have equal length, and consequendy, the magnimde of the frequency response is con.'itant and independent of frequency- Such a iy.'item is com-

682

ym
iit
%
-a

The Laplace Transform

Chap. 9

s-plane ^1
(R.

H{£u.)|
1

<a) u>

<H(j(uJ

Figure 9.21 (a) PolezeTo plot for an all-pass system; (b) mafgnrtutie and phase of an all-pass frequency response,

moraly referred to as an ati-pass system, since it passes all frequencies with equal gain (ot
attenuation). The phase of the frequency respond is Oi - ^2* ^^^ since ^1 =77-^2,

Fk^ttx Fig\ire 9.2 Ka>, &^ = tan " '(w/t;), and thus.

(9,S0)

The magnitude and phase of '^^ /w) are Illustrated in Figure 9.21(b).

(9.U1)

9,5 PROPERTIES OF THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
In ftxploiung ttie Fyurier iransfcrm, we iclicd heavil)? on the set of piDpenies developed in Section 4.3. In the current section, we cnnsider the coircsponding set of prppertieA for

3

Sec. 9,5

Properties of the Laplace Transtorm

6£3

the Laplace transfonn. The denvadons of many of these re&ults are analogous to those of the corrcspondmg properties for the Fourier transform, ConsequcDtl^, we will not pre^jent ttie derivations in detail, some of which are left as exercises at the end of the
chapter. (See Problems 9.52-9.54.)

9. 5. f Unearfzy of the Laplace TVajisform
If

^M -- ,,, ^ JVf,/ W\ with a region of convercence that ^ii] be d|,,(,j^ a, J?,

and

-- X2<ft^].

^

VX,(/.)\

with a region of convergence that
^.^it^ denote as ^2,

then

-- ROC ax]U} + f^X2{t) * * aXi{s) + bX^is), with
n coEitaining R^ Rj-

(9,82)

As indicated, the region of convergence of X(s) is at least the intersection of ff, and ^2,

which could be empiy, in which case X{s) has no region of convergence--i.e., jf(r) haj^

> no Laplace transform. For example, fcr jc<;) as in eq, (9.47) of Example 9.7, with ^

ROC U the

for X(s) is the intersection of the ROCs for the two terms in ihe sum h < 0,

there are no common points in R[ and fij; that is, the iotersecLion is empty, and thus, x(t)

ROC has no Laplace transform. The

can aJso be larger than the inters e^^tion. As a simple

= example, for xi(r) = jf^CO^nd a

-bin eq. (9.S2), x{t) = 0, and thus, X(s) -= 0. The

ROC QfX{s) is then the entire j-piane.

ROC The

associated v/ith a linear combination of terms can always be constnicted

ROC by using the prtiperties of the

developed in Section 9.2, Speciflc^liy. from the inter-

section of die ROCs for the individual lerms (assuming diat it is not empty), we can find a

ROC We line or stnp thm i& in the

of the linear combination.

then extend this to the right

{iR^s} increasing) and to the left {(R^s) decreasing) to the nearest poles (which may be

at inrinity).

Example 9. 1

ROC In this example, we ihustraie tlie fact that the

for the Laplace transform of a hnear

combination of sigjials can sometimes extend beyond the mlcisectiun of the ROC^ for

the individunl terms. Consider

jc(0 = XiiO - X2(.rl

(9.83)

684

The Laplace Trarsform

Chap, 9

where the T^pLavc [Timsfarms jf x\ {f} and xÝ{r) are^ respectively.

^|{*) - ^_^ y

(R*{s}>-1.

:9.84)

anJ

Xiis) =

1

is+ 1X^ + 2/

CK^{s}> -I.

(9.S5J

m Tht pole-z-tru plot, including the ROCs lbrXi(j) and X^U), is shnwTi Figures 9 22(a)
and(b). Fmmeq.(9.82K

X(..) ^

1

.^ + "f

(5 + IKj + 2>

si 1
If + 1"Xa + 2j

1
j + 2"

i^86>

= Thus, in the linear cfitnbinalioci of xi(t) and Jca^O^ the pole at s

- 1 is canceled hy a

zeroatj = -1 The pole-zero plot for X(.0 = ^iU) ^3(5) isshown inFigure^ 22(c>.

> The imers&Jticin df ihe ROCs for X^Ik) and ^^(jj iy (JMj}

1.

Ifowevcr,

sinte

the

ROC ROC i.s alwa^'s bounded by a pole or infinity, for this example the

for Xis) tan be

cxttridtd to the lelt to be bounded by rhe pole ax s = -2, as a reyult of die pole-zero

Ciinf^llytion at J = --1

^7^

^J1

1

1

5-plarp

J

Hi

J

-T

CR^

e

L

Ifrf-

s-plane r^
01 *r

3-i>iarie
(H^

Ca>

m

^cl

Figure 9.22 Pole-zero plots and ROCs for Example 9.13' (a) ;^i(s);

XM- (d) X2\$): (c) X^{s] -

- The ROC for X,{s) X^.is) includes the ifiter-

section a! fl[ and Bz. which can then be extended to be bounded by the pole
at s ^ -2.

9.5,2 Time Shifting
If
-- Ji{t) < ^ Xis).
then

with ROC = R,

x(t - tu)

ROC e~''''X{s\ with

= R.

<9.87)

Sec. 9.5

PrD&ertfes of the Laplace Transform

685

9.5.3 Shifting in the^-Domairr
If
-- x{t) * > X{sl
then

with ROC = R,

È

e^'^'xi,}) *

- X(s ^

&^)).,

with ROC = fi + <R^5o}

0-^^)

ROC That is, the

associated with X{s - .tq) ^s thatof X(È\ shifted by CR^^ft}, Ttius, for any

-- value s that is in R. i;he value s + (Re{sft} will be in R\. This is illustrated in Figure 9.23.
NoLe thatif A'(j)hasapolcor7sroatf ^ a£theiiX(j -- Jti)hasa poleor zero at.?-^jy = a

^ + i.e., s

a iy.

-- An important tpecial case of eq (9.8R) is ^^hen Vi^ -- jojq i.e., when a signal xO)

is used to modujaie a periodic complex exponcticial W^" ^ In this case, eq. (9.8R) becrimes

-- ROC e^<^*^'x{t) ^ > X(5-;woX with

- R.

(9.89)

The nghc-hand side of eq (9.89) can be interpreted as a shift in the j-plane parallel lo
= the jio-axi^, Ttiai is, if the LapUce transform of j{t) has a p(]le or zero at j fl. then the
Laplace iransform of eJ'^^^'xif) has a pole or zero at i = a + ywr>

9.5.4 Time Scaling

If

^ .^(r)

X{a\ with roc = R,

^m
I a-filane
(R^

dni

TT

^

I

^* r? '

(So) I

I S- plane

*1

*

(a)

(b)

Figure 9,23 Effect on the ROC of sifting in the s-domain. (a| the ROC of

686
then

Th¨ Laplaoe Transform

Chap. 9

(9.90)

m R That is, for any value s

[which i$ illustrated in Figure 9.24(a)], ihe value ^/a will

> be in /?L, as illiLstrated in Figure 9.24<b) for a. positive value of tj

1. Note that, for

L > (3 there is a compresjiion in the size of the RCK: of Xis} by a. factor of l/a, as depicted

ROC in Figure 9.24(b), while for < ¨ < 1, the

is expanded by a factor of I/a. Also,

ROC eq, (9.9[}) implies that if a iw negative, the

nndergoej^ a re^vcrsal plus a scaling. In

ROC > particular, as depicted in Figure 9.24(c), the

of l/|ijjX(j^a) forO :=- a

- 1 involves

s-plar>e
(R^

dm
5' plane

y

(R^

CaJ

(b)

^m

1

1

s-plane

1

1

1

fl 1

|[?

fR^

a

a

j

fc)

Fj^re 9.Z4 Effect on ^le ROC of time scaling: (a) ROC of Xi&y, {b) ROC Of (1/|d|)X(a/a) for J > 1; (c) ROC of

Sec. 9.5

Properties of the Laplace Transform

667

ROC a reversa] about the Jto-nnh^ uigether with a cliange in the size of tfie

by a factor of

^Aal Thus, time reversal of x(n results in a reversal of the ROC. That is.

-- M-0 ' * V(-j), with ROC = -R.

(9.9t)

9.5.5 Conjugation

If

-- ROC x{t} * ^ X{s). witli

= R.

then

-- x*(0 * > X\s*l with ROC = Jf.

(9.92) <9.93)

Therefore,

= X(s) X'is*) when x{t) is real.

(9.94)

Consequently, if jr(/) is reai and Lf X{s) has a pole or zero at j = j^ (i.e., if X(s) is un-
= bounded or zero at .f >sn), then XU) also has a pole or zero at the compleit conjugate
point s =^ s^. For example^ the transform A(^) for the real signal j:(0 in Example 9.4 has
poles at J = 1 Ý 3j and leros at j = (--5 Ý jJTi)f2.

9.S.6 Convofution Property
If

x\{^} +--^ X\{sX

viwhROC ^ Ru

and

then

X'.it) ^-^ X2(s\

with ftOC = R2.

-- ROC xXO * X2(t) ^ * X] (s)X2{sX with

containing Ri n R2,

(9.95)

ROC In a manner similar to the linearity property set forth in Section 9.5.1, the

of

X](s)X2is) includes the intersection of the ROCs of X\ {s) and X2{s) and may be larger if

pole- zero cancellation occurs in the product. For example, if

T X,(.0 - j+ 1
s+

\R^{s}> -2,

i9.96)

668

The LapJacfi Transforrr

Chap 9

and

^:(J) = i^4+^1-

6{^{s}> -I.

(9.97)

ROC then Xi(s)X2{s) = 1, and its

is the entire j-piane.

As we saw in Chapter 4, the convolution property in the context of the Fourier

transfoTtn plays an impoTt^nt ro^e if\ the analysis of linear tin^e-invstrianl systenns. In Sec-

tions 9.7 and 9.8 we will exploit in some detail the convolution property for Laplace tmns-

forms for the analysis of LTI systems in general and£ more specifically, for the class of

systems represented by linear constant- coefficient differential equations.

9,5.7 Differentiation in the Time Domarn

If
then

^ xiO

A(.t),

with ROC = R,

dx(t\ ^

(9.98)

This property foijows by differentiating both sides of the inver.se Laplace U-ansfoim as expressed in equation (9.35). Specifically* let

Then

^^ ' ^XU)e^'ds.

(9.99)

ROC Consequently, dx{r)Mt is ihe inverse Laplace transfotrn of sX{s\ The

of sXis) in-

ROC cludes the

of A'(j) and may be larger if XU) has a firsi-order pole at i = that is

oanceledby Che multiplicaiion by .T. For example, if ;c(0 ^ h(0. then A;(.0 = 1/?, with an

ROC that is (Sie{s\ > 0, The derivative of x(t) is an impulse with an associated Laplace

ROC transform that is unity and an

that i.s the entire j-plane.

9.5,6 Differentiation in the s-Domain
Differentiating both sidea of the Laplace transform equalitm (9.3), i.e.*

X(x) ^ I x{t)-"dt.

we obtain

dX{sy da

^^t\tf)(xt[\tj)pe---'-''dt.

4

'

Sec. 9.5

Propertpes of the Laplace Transform

Consequently, if then

--J!
^(0 * * Xis\

with ROC = /f.

-- -tX{T) * >

r^.

with ROC = R,

689
(9,100)

The next two examples iJlustrate the use of this property,

Exarrypte 9, 1

Let ii-i finJ the L^pl^ce [runsfurm of

- Kit)

te'^^'uit).

Since

It follows from eq. (9.100) that

Ji

1

3 +a

iSi^s) > -a.

re '"u(f)

ds i + a

1
{s + a)^'

In fact, by repeated appJicalion of eg. <9.100). we obtain

> <5l^{j}

a.

/-
Tre-"'HO)
and, more generally.
,^-i
(n - 1)!

1
+ (:f a)^

(Si^s) > -a.

(f + a)'

'

t^ lOlj
i,9A02) (9.103) (9.104)

As the tiext example illustrates, this specific Laplace tran&farm pair i$ particularly useful when applying partial-fraction expansion to the determination of the inverse Laplace
transform of aratioral function with multiple-order poles.
Example 9. 15
Consider the Laplace trsnsfonn

Applying the partial-fraction expansion method described in the appendix, we can write

Xis) =

* + -i^, 6{^5\> -L

(y + l)2 + (j 1) s + 2

(9 105)

690

V]e Uplacs Transform

Chap. 9

ROC Since the

is to the right of the poles at j = - ] and --2. the inverse transfoim of

each of the terms h a right- sided signal* and, applying eqs, (9. \ 4) and (9. 1 f)t), we obtain

the inverse transform

Ji{t\ = {lte~' - ~' ^ ^e~^']uij).

9.S.9 Integration In the Time Dom<iin

If

then

x(0

XisX

with ROC - R,

ROC jc(tV^t ^---* - X(s), with

containiTig

^

/fn{(R4j}>0}.

(5.106)

This property \& the inverse of the differentiation property set forth in Section 9.5,7. It can be derived using the convolution property presented in Section 9.5.6. Specifically,

x{T)dT =^ u(;) + r{/>.
1.

From Example 9, 1, with ci = 0,

È] w(0

> ^e{s) 0,

(9.] 07) (9.108)

and thus, from the convolution property,

(9.109)

ROC ROC with an

that contains the intersection of the

ofX(s) and the ROC of the Laplace

ROC traijs fonn of u{t ) in eq. (9.108 ), which re suits in the

given in eq . (9 . 1 06)

9.5. 1 The initial' and Final-Value TbeoFemi

< Under ths specific constraints that x{i} = for /

and that x(t} contains no impulses

or higher order singularities at the origin, one can directly calculate, from the Laplace
-- transform, the initial value ri(0"^) i.e,, x{0 as r approaches zero from positive values of
-- -- t and the final value--i.e., the litnit as f sr ¨> of x(tX The initial-value theorem states

that

x(0^) ^ Utn.TX(:FX

(9.110)

while th&^final-value theorem says that
lim j^O = limjjf(j).

(9111)

The derivation of these results is con.sidered in Problem 9.53,

Sec. 9.5

Properties of the Liplace Transform

691

Example 9,16

The [nJtLal- and final-value theorems can bi useful Ln etieckjng (he coirecinei^s of ib¨
Laplace transform cali^ulations for a signd. For ciiampJc, consider the signA\ j^{f) in
Ea^mple 9.4, Ftotti eq, 02^}, we see that ;t(0+) = 2. Also, using eq. (.9.29), we find

Ihat

---- -- litrLfA(j) = lim

--^

-- = -

2,

which IS consistent with the initial-value theorem in tq. (9.110^,

9.5.1 1 Table of Properties
In Table 9, 1^ wc summaiiEe the propenies devdoped in this section. In Section 9,7, many of these properties are used in applying the Laplace traiisfomn to the analysis and characterization of linear time-invariant systems. As we have illustrated in several eicam-
ples, the various properties of Laplace transforms and their ROCs can provide us with

TABLE 9.1 PRCPERT1ES OF THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM

SecticML

Property

Signal

Laplace TVansform

X{s)

R

ROC

9.5,1
9 5.2 9.5.3
954^ 9 5.5
9.5.6
957
9.5.S
9.5.9
9 5.10

Xzts)

Hi

LincLint^
Time shifting Shifting in the f-Domain
Cf>nj uÈa[ion Convolution Differentiation in the
Time Dumain
Differentiation in the j-Duiaain
iDtegratJDn in the Time Domain

Xi(_t)*X2.{t)
P"
-tlif)
x(t)J(t)

itXt\s) + bXA^) e "-XU)
[aj ifl|
X^:s)Xits) sX(.s)

Al least F, r\ fli
R

Shifted version of fi {\.c., i IS

ROC inl^e

R> if s - Vf, i^ in

ROC Scaled

^ae-, t is in the

ROCif j/flihinW)

Ji

n At least /f|

/?:

P At LcASiL

ds -Xls]

R

R n > At least

{(Ji-eis]

0}

if xU\ ^

< ffir f

Initial- and Fi naJ- Value Theflremiand xit) contains nu impul.ses nr liiÈhej-order singutanlic^ at j = O, then
^(0 ) - hm sXis)

Iiittj(fJ - h.msX(s)

1

692

The Laplace Transform

Chap. 9

considerable information about a signal and its transform that can be useful either in characterizing the signal or in checking a calculation. In Sections 9.7 and 9.R and in some of
the problems at the end of this chapter, we give sevei^ other examples of the uses of these
properties.

9.6 SOME LAPLACE TRANSFORM PAIRS
As we indicated in Section 9.3, the inver.se Laplace transfomi can often be easily evaluated
by decomposing X{s) into a linear combination of .simpler terms, the inverse transform of each of which c^n be recognized. Listed in Table 9.2 are a number of useful Laplace

TABLE 9.2 LAPLACE TBANSFORMS OF ELfMEftnAflY FUNCTIONS

Tran&fDrm pair

SignaJ

Tk-ansfomi

KOC

1

*<r>

1

Allf

2

uW

1
<H^{s\>0

i

3

-ui-n

1

^ Cft*?{j}

s

4

<.-])!''t^*

i

> (RÈ{j| Q

5

I

< <Re{s\ D

s"

6£J^

S "L(f)

1

S^*{3> > - a

s+a

7

-e-^'ui-O

1

< (H*{j} a

S + iX

a
*%?

J- ¯'u"i*t'\^

1

> -a iJl*{j}

in -IV.'

is -1- ff )"

1

9

[n-l}\' "^ '*

(i + a)"

tH*{j} '^ -a

10

Ht-T)

e'^

AH J

1

[COi*c>o/J¨(f)

J

> (R*{jJ

J^ +*c£^

12

fsmct>od¨(')

a£Q

> [Riffj}

j' -titl

s + ci

13

[e "' Costu\3t]u(0

+ + (J

tt>2

fi>g

i%e{s] :> -tt

Wy

14

W^' MnftPQ0*'(O

+ + <J

Of >*

<ttg

> -a CHiffj}

15

J"

At] J

16

I

> <R*{j| a

ñ

^

'

J"

p times

Sec. 9.7

Analysis And Characteri^atior; of LTI Systems Using the Laplace Transform

693

transform pairs. Transform pair 1 follows directJy from eq. (9 J), Transf(>rm pairs 2 and
6 follow directly from E^ojnple 9, 1 with a "= and a ^ a^ respectively. Transform pair 4 was developed in Example 9 14 using the differentiation property. Transform pair 8
m foUows from transform pair 4 using the property set forth Section 9.5.3. Transfonn pairs
3, 5, 1, and 9 are based on transform pairs 2,4, 6 and 8, respectively, together with the time-
scaling property of section 9.5.4 with a ^ --1. Similarly, transform pairs 10 through 16
can all be obtained from earlier ones in the table using appropriate properties in Table 9.1
(see Problem 9.55),

9.7 ANALYSIS AND CHAI2ACTERJZATJON OF LTI SYSTEMS USING
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM

One of the important applications of the Laplace transform is in the analysis and character-
ization of LTI systems, Itsrole for this classof systems stems directly fn>m the convotution property (Section 9.5.6). Spet:iflcally. the Laplace transforms of the inpuL and output of an LTI sy.stem are related through multiplication by the Laplace transform of the impulse response of the system. Thus,

Yis) = mÈ)X{iX

fy.ll2)

where X(s), Y{sX and His) are the Laplace transforms of the input, output, and impulse
m response of the system, respectively. Equation (9.112) is the counterpart, the context
of Laplace transforms, of eq. (4.56) for the Fourier transfomr. In fact, for s = jw. each

of the Laplace transforms in eq. (9. 112) reduces to the respective Fourier transform, and

the equation correspondJs exactly to eq. {4.5b). Also, from our discussion in Section 3,2

im the response of LTI systems to complex exponentials, if the input to an LTI system is
= xiO e", then the output will be H(s)e'''; i.e., e^' lA an eigenfunction of the system with

eigenvalue equal to the Laplace transfonn of the impulse response.
For.f = Jii>, H{^) isthe frequency response of the LTI system. In the broader context

of the Laplace transform, H(x) is commonly referred to as [he !;y.-^tem pncTwn or, alternatively the transfer function. Many properties of LTI systems can be closely associated

We with the characteristics of the system function in the j-plane

illustrate this next by

examining several important properties and clasps of systems.

9.7.1 CausaJity
For a causal LTI .system, the impulse response is zero for r <
Cc^nsequently, from the discussion in Section 9.2, we see that

and thus is right sided

ROC The

associated with the system function for a

causal system is a right-half plane.

it should be Atressed, however, that die converse of this statement i^ not necessarilj

ROC true. That is, as illustrated in Example 9. 19 to follow, an

to the right of the rightmost

61

694

The Laplace Transform

Chap. 9

pole does not guarantee that a system is caxi&al; rather* it gxiarantees onlj that the impulse

response is right sided. However, if His) is rutioiml^ then, as illustrated in Examples 9 J 7

and 9. IS to follow, we can detertnitie whether the styslem is causal simply by checking to

ROC see if its

is aright-half plane. Specifically,

For a systein with a rational sysiem fijtiction, causality

ROC of the system is equivalent to the

being the

right-half plane to the right of the rightmost pole.

Example 9, T 7

Cons]der a system with impulse response

hit) = e-*u{t\

(9.113)

< Since hiji) = for / 0, this s.ystem is causal. Also, the system ftinctiftn can be obtained
fjDm Example 9. ,

W(J) = ---r.

SI

L

3i4f^ > - 1^

(9.114)

ROC In this case, the system function is rational and the

in e^^. (9,114) is to the ri^htof

the nghtmost jKile, consistent with our statement that causality for systems with rationul

ROC system fiincrions is equivalent to the

being to the right of the ri^tmost pole.

Exampje 9. 1
Consider a iystem with impul^ re^poniic

Since h(t} ^ functian k

for .' <: 0, this sj'Stem is not causal. Also, froni Example 9.7, the system

ff{s) = -5^^--^,1 -\ <m^{s|< +1.

ROC Thus, li{s) is rational anti has an

that is nrti to the nght of the the rigKlmost pole,

consistent with the fact that the system is not causal.

Excimple 9.19
Consider the system fimciion

ms) = -^,

<Si^i} > -1.

(9.115)

ROC For this system^ the

is to (he rigin of the rightmost pol*. Thenifore, the impulse

resjjonse must be right sidedr To determine the impulse response, we first use the lesult

.

Sec. 9.7

Analysis And Characterizaticin d LH Systems Using the Laplace Transfcrm

695

of EtLampk 9J:

^ e 'u(i)

- ^--

n -k- \

Cft^j} > -1.

(9.116)

Next^ from the time-shifting property of Section 9.5.2 [eq. (5.S7J1 the factor f ' in eq. {^9. 1 15) can be accounted for by ashiftin ttie time function in cq. (9.ll6l.Thc^n

J+ 1 so that the impul^ resprtnse as^oci^ted with the system is

< -- which js noii/.crQ for 1 r < 0, Hence, the system js not causal. This example serves
as a rcmind<:r ih3t tausality implies that the RCX: is to the nght of the rJghtmosr pole but the converse is not in generji] tniCn unless the system fiincbon. is rattonal.

A In an exactly analogous tnanner, we can deal with thfi concept of anticauiality.

= > system is anticau^sa^ if its impulse response hit)

for r 0. Since in that case h{t)

ROC would be left sided, -we know frarti Section 9.2 that the

of the system function H(s)

would h^ve to be a left-half plane. Agaiti, in general* the converse is riot true. That is, if

ROC the

of His) is a tefi-half pUne, all we know is that h{t) is left ^ded. However, if H(j)

ROC is rational, then having an

to the left of the leftmost pol& is equivalent to the system

bein^ anticausal

9.7.2 StabiTily

ROC The

of Ii(x) can also be related to the stability of a system. As mentioned in Sec-

tion 2.3*7, the stability of an LTI system is equivalent to its impulse response being abso-

lutely ititegrable, in which case (Section 4.4} the Fourier transform of the itnpulse response

converges. Since the Fourier transform of a signal equals the Laplace transform evaluated

along the jtj-a\is, we have the following:

ROC An LTI system is suble if and only if the

of

its system function H(^s) includes the ytu-axis [i.e.,

- (R^{.v]

0].

Example 9.20
Let us consider an LTI system A'ith svstem function

ROC Since the

w& hain nut bttn specified,

know from our discu5S^i[>n in Section 9.1 that

there aje several difierent ROCs. and, consequently, several different system impulse re-

sponses that can be associated with thealgebraicexpressinn for //(j) given in eq. (9.119).

696

TN Upiace Transform

Chap, 9

If, however, we have information abhciut the cau.!;atity or stability of the system^ tht ap-

ROC proprialt

can be id^ntitled. For sxample, if the sysLem is knowti to be causal^ the

ROC will be that i/idicated in Figure 9.25(2}^ with impy]?e response

h{l) =\^e '+^-e'- u(0

(9.120)

ROC Note that this particular choice of

does nul include the ja£-axis, and consequently,

the corresponding systejii is uiistabJe (as tan be checked by obsi^rvmg that h(r} a not
ROC absolutely integrablc). Oi the orher hEuid, if the system h known lo be jfaWe, the

is that given in Figure 9.25(b). and the corresponding impulf>e ^cs^p(J^^c 3^

which is absolutely inteorable. Finally, for the RCXT in Figure 9.25((;>. the s>^tem is
anticausa] and unstable, with
h(i) = -l^e '+1.^'\,,(-:)

s-pjane

W

(b)

^m

s-plane

'X-

-1

12

(R.

ffi)

Figure 9.25 Po$3ible ROCs for the system tunctian of Example 9,20 wrth

= poles at s

-1 and s ^ 2 and a zero 3.t s = 1; (a) causal, unstable system;

(b) noncausa. stable system; [t] aniicausal, unstable system.

Sec 9.7

Anal^^s And Cfiaracierization of LTl Systems Usma Uie Lapiac¨ Transform

697

It is perfeclly pojiii^ible, of ctiutie, fot a system to be stable (or unstable) and have

a system function that is not rational. For example, the system function in eq. (9.115) is

no( rational, and its impulse response in eq. (9.118) is abscilutel> integrable. indicating

that the sy&tem is stable. However, for systems with rational system functions, stability is

ea,';iiy niLcrpreted in terms of the poles of the system. For example, for the pole-zero plot in

ROC Figure 9.25, stability corresponds to the choice of an

that is between the two poles,

so that the ya>-axis is contained in the ROC,

For one particular and very important class of systems, stability can be characterized

very simply in terms of the locaLons of the poles. Specifically, consider a causai LTI system

ROC wiLh a rational system function H{s). Since the system is causal, the

is to the nght of

ROC the nghtmosi pole. Consequently, for this system to be stable (i,e., for the

to include

the yw-axis), the rightmost pole of H{s) must be to the lej^ of the jt>-ax]S- Th^t is.

A causal system with rational system function His)
-- is stable if and only if aU of the poles of H(s) lie in
the left-haJf of the j-plane i.e,, all of the poles have
negative real parts.

Example 9.Z1

Consider again the causal system in Example 9.17. The impulse response in eq. (9.113)

IS absolutely integrable, and thus the system is stable. Consistent with this, we see that

m - the pole of /fU) eq. (9. 114} is at j

-1, which is ici the left-half of the j-plane. In

contrast, the causat system with impulse response

= hit) *r^u(;)

-- 1$ unstable, ^ince h{t} is not absolutely mtegr^le. Also, in this^ case

ms)

!-=:,

m^si > 2,

SO the system has a pole at J = 2 inthc righthalfof tbe^-plane.

Example 9,22

Let us consider the class of causal second^rder systems previaiisl> discussed \n Sections 9.4.2 and 6,5.2. The impulse response and system function are, respectively

h(0 = M[e'^' - e'^^'Mn

<9,l2l)

and

where

¨(J) =

<^l

+ j^ 2^ti>,,s +tol

-J {s- rr)U--c,y

= C\

-fttJ,, + w,iv^^- -

T,
^4- ^-
27FM

<9.122)
<9.123) (9.124) (9.125)

694

The Laplace Transform

Chap. 9

^m

I

I

4-plarva

I
J

-t***n|

ifti

Figure 9.26 with i <W.

Pole location? end ROC for a causal $flCQnd-order system

> In Figure 9.19. wc illustrated the pole locations for ^ 0. In Figure 9.26^ we illustrate

the pole locations fbr f < 0. As is evident from the latter figure and from cqs , (9. 1 24)

< and (9 125), for f

< both poles have positive real parts, Consequer.tly, for f 0, the

cau^ second-order system canaot be stat>]er This is also evidem in eq. (9.121), ^ince,

> withtH^cil > OaiidCR^ftj} 0, &ach icrm grows cxpoiientially asr increases, and thus

kt^t) carnbDl be absolutely integiable.

9.7.3 LTl Systems Characterized txy Linear Constant-Coefficrent

Dlfferentfaf Equations

In Section 4.7, we discuss^ the use of the Fourier transform to obtain the frequency re-

sponse of an LTI system characteriied by a linear constant-coefficient differential equatioji

vvitbout first obtaining the Jmpul^ response or time-domain solution. In an exactly anal-

ogous mantier. the properties of the L^lace transfomi can be ei^ploited to directly obtain

the system function for an LTl system characteriied by a linear constant- coefficient dif-

We ferential equation.

illustrate this procedure in the next example.

Bxamp\e 9,23
Consider an LIT system for which the input x(i) and outpuL yii) satisfy' the linear
constant-coefficierLt differential equation

dy{t] + 3y{r) = x{tl
(it

(9.126)

Sec. 9.7

Anal/sjs and Char^ctefizatlon of LTI Systems Using the Laplace Transform

699

Applying ihe L^pJace rransfonn lo both sides of eq. <9, 1 26), amJ using i^ lji>earity and
differentiation properties set forth in Sections 9.5.1 atid 9.57, respectively [(eqs. ^9,82)
ajjd (?-98)]h we oblain Ihc algebraic equalioti
(9.127)
Since, from eq. <9. II 2), the system function is

we obtain, for this system ^

ms) =
x{sy

His) =
j+3

(9,12S)

This, then, provides the algebnuc eipiessipn for ihe system fundi on, but not the

region of convergence. In fact, as we discussed iri Section 2.4, the differential equation

itself is not a cotnplete specification flf the LTl system, iind there are. in general, differ-

ent impulse responses, all consistent with the differential equation. If, in addition to the

ROC differential ei:|Uution, we knov, that the sysLcm is causal, then the

caji be infemed

> to be tf) the Tight of the rightmost pole, which iD this case coirespondi to (R^j^ - 3, If

m ROC the .sysiem were known be anticiiusitl, then the

associated with //rj> would be

m tR*{j} < " 3. The corresponding impulse response the causal case is

tiH) - e-^'uit),

(9.129)

wheteas in the anLicansal case it is

h{6 = -e-''ii(-fX

(9.130)

The same procedure used to obtain H{x) from the differential equation in Example 9.23 can be applied more generally. Consider a general linear constant-coefficient dif-
ferentia] equation of the form

A'
ffi

M
-E^.
k=i\

(^.131)

Applying the Laplace transform to both sides and UHing the linearity and differenti-
ation pnipeiries repeatedly, we obtain

or
M ' HU) - t-0

(9.132)
(9J33)

700

The Laf] lace Transform

Chap 9

Thus, thfi iiystem function for a system specified by a differentia] equation is always ratio nal, with aeros at the solutions of

M Y.b,s^ =
i^\)

(9.134)

and pt)Jes at the solutions of

XV -0.
it-0

f9.n5)

Consistently with our previous discussion, eq. (9.133) does not include a specification of

the region of convergence of H{s), since the linear constant-coefficient differential equa-

tion by Ltself does not constrain the region of convergence. However, with additional in-

fiJUDation, such as knowledge about the subilit> or causality of the system, the region of

convergence can be inferred. For example, if we impose the condition of initial rest on the

ROC system, so that it is causal, die

will be to the riglit of the rightmost pole.

Example 9.24

An RLC circuit whose capacitor voltage and inductor current are initially zero constitutes
an LTl sy stem descnbable by a 11 near tons tant-coeffi cient di fferent i al equaii on Consi der the .'^ries f(LC circuit in Figure 9,27. Let the voltage across the voltage source be the input $ign£l x(0, and let thfi voltage measured across ijie capacitor be the output signal
v{^) Equaling the sum of the voltages across the resislor, inductor, and capacitor with the source voltage, we fsbiain

RCm . LC^^^ . yO) = .ia

ds

dt'

(?-l36)

Applying eq. (9. i 33), we obtain

ULC
s^ +(Rfl)s + WLCy

(9 137)

C As shown in Problem 9.64, if the values of R. L, and are all fKwitive, the poles of
this system function will have negative teal parts, and consequently, the sjstem will be
stable.

yu)
Figure 9.27 A series RLC cin^uit

--

Sec. 9.7

Analysis anc Characterisation of LTI Systems Using ttw Lapboe Transform

701

9,7.4 Examples Relating System Behavior to the System Function
As we have seen, system properties aixch as causality and stability can be direcdy related
to the system function and its characteristics. In fact, each of the properties of Laplace
transforms thai we have described can be used in this way tft relate the behavior of the system to the system function. In this section, we give several examples illustrating this.
Example 9.25
Supptist we know that if the input to an LTI system is

then the output js
v|j> - \e-' - e ^'\u<.t\
As wt ndw ^how, from this knowledge we can determirjC the system function for this system antl from this can immediately deduct an nmber of other propertEenof the sy^itm
Taking Laplat;e ir^mipfurm^ of x[t) and >^/), we get

X{s) j+U3-.

(Re[i} > -3,

and

-- y{s) =

ljr+

-|^ 1J(J

-. +2)'

From e<^. (9.112), we can then conclude that

{R*fj} > -

His) = XU)

VU^ + (.t

2)

J- + 3* + 2'

ROC Furthermore, we csm also determine ihe

f[>r this iystem. In particular, we

RQC know frnm the convolution property iiel forth in Section 9,3,6 that the

ot Yis ) must

include ai least the intersections of tht ROCs of Xis) and His). E^aniiniiif the thret

ROC = pesAible chfiicfth ffir tliL-

of H{s) Cie-, l[) the le^ft of the pole at j

-2^ be[ween the

fieles at --2 and -1, and lo the right of the pole al 5 - - 1), we see thai ihe anly choice

that is consistent with the ROCs of Xis) arJ y(s\ is (R^{s} > -V. Since this is u the

right of the rightrtiost pole of //i^j), we conclude that //(j) is causal, and since both 3oles

of //(j) have negalive real parts, it follows tKat the system is stable. Moreover, from the

relationstilp between eqs. (9. 131) and (9.133), we can specify the differentia] equation

that, together with the condition of Initial rest, characttri?È^ ihe system

Example 9.26
Suppose that we are given the follovtirig infftrmfliiLin about an LTl sy^tt^m:
1* The system is causal.
2* The system function is rational and has only two pole^, at .\. -- --2 and \ = 4.

Toz

The Laplace Transiorm

C^ap, 9

MO 3. if Mt) = h then

= 0.

4£ The value of th(! impulse response at r = 0"^ is 4.

From this it£ formation we would, like to determine the system function of the sysiem Fiom the ftrsl twtP facts, w-e know that the system is unstable (hince it is eausal and
has a pole at j =^ 4 %vith positive real paii>^nd ili^t the system function is of ihe fonm

(j 4 2)(j - 4) s--2i -&'

where /3(j) is a pf)|ynotnial in ,t- Becau^^ the response v<r) to the input jc(/) ^ 1 = ^" ^

-- H0\ must equal

e*^' ^ ^<0). we conclude, ffom fact 3, that p(Q) - f^ le . that pU)

must have a rotit at j = and thus is of the form

= pis) sijis),

whete tf(.v) is another polynomjal in J-
T^inally, from fact 4 and the mittal-value thtorem in Section 9.5 10, we see that

--^'^ limjW(5) - hin--

= 4,

(9.13S)

As J ^^ oc, the terms of highetit power in j in both the nunietatot and the defiomitiator

of j//{.v) dominate and thus are the only ones of imporiance in evaluating et|. (9.138).

Furttiermoic, if the numeraloi hai higher degree than ^he detvommatot. Vhe ^imil will

divei^e. Consequently, we can obtain a Hnite nonzero value for the limit only if the

degree of the numeratorof j/f (j') \s the same as the degree of the denommator Since the

we degree of the denominator i s 2 ,

canclude

that,

for

eq .

(9. 1 33)

to

hal d,

^{ j)

niu^t

he

a

We = coiift.iartt--i.e., ^(j>

^.

cafl evaluate this constant by evaluating

K ELqualLng eqs. (9.138) and C9.1i9)j we &ee that -- 4i acid thu.5.

Example 9.27
Consider n stable and causal system with impmlsc irespot\s* h{t) Atid tysl^m f\inctit>n
H(s). Suppose HU) is rational oontains a pole at j = -2, and doefi not have a zeri> at
the oiigin. The location of all other polts and zeros is unl^own. For each of the following statements let us determine whether we caii definitely say that it is true, whether we can
definitely say that it is false, or whether theie is insufficient information to ascertain the statement's truth:
(a) 3T{ftfr)¨*^] converges..
(bj I ^^ hii)dt = a
(cj thit) is the impulse rtspoDse of a causul and stable system.

Sec. 9.7

Analysis and Characterization of LTI Systems Using Ihe Laplace Transform

703

(dj dkitydt contams at l&ast one pole in its Laplace trflnsfonin (¨) ^!r) has finite duratiOTt.

(g) \\m,^.MU) = 2.

Statement (a) is false£ since ^[h{t)e^} corTespondip to Itie value of (he Laplace

transform of hU) at s -- 3. If this converges^ it impLLe^ that s = -3 is in the ROC.

A ROC caus;al and stable system must always have its

to the right of a]l of its poles.

= However^, s = - 3 is not to the right of the pole at s --2.

Statement <b> is falsei because it is eqaivalent to staling that H(0) -- 0. This con-

tradicts the fact that //(.v) does not have a zero at the origin.

Statement (c) is true. According to Tablc9rK the prvpperty set forth in Section 9,5,8,

ROC ROC the Laplace transfbrm of ih{i) has the ijame

as thil of H{s)r This

includes

< the jfl>-axis and therefore, the corresponding syitem is stable. Also, hit) = for r

< implies that thU) = f<)r r 0. Thui^ rhit) represents the incise response of a causa]

system.

Statement (d) is true. According to Table 9A,dh(i)/dt has the Laplace transform
sH(sX The multiplication by s does not eliminate the pole at * = --2.

Statement (e> is false. If hir) is of finite duration, then if its Laplace traDsform

ROC has any points in its ROC, the

must be (he entire j-plane. Hcwever£ this is not

consistent with H{s) having a pole a( j = -2.

Statement (f) is false. If it were Ime, then, since FJ(s) has a pole at i = -2^ it

= 2 must &1&0 h^ve ^ pole at j

This is inconsistent with the fact thar all the poles of a

cau^ and stable system must be in the left half of the .r-plane.

The truth of statement Cg) cannot be asccnaincd with The information given. The statement requires that the degree of the nutnerator and denominator of His) be equal, and we have insufficient information ^>out His) to determine whether this is the case.

9.7.5 Butterworth FMters
^ In Example 6.3 we briefly introduced the widely-used class of LTI systems known
Butterworth fihers. The filters in this o]^<^!^ have a number of properties^ includitig the characteristics of the rnagoitude of the frequency i^spon^ of each of these filters in the passband, that make them attractive for practical implementaiion. As ^ further illustration
of the usefulness of Laplace transfotmis, in this section we use Laplace transform tech-
niqiies to determine the system futiction of a Butterworth fiUcr from the specificatioti of its frequency response magnitude.
An Mh-order lowpass Butterworth filter has a frequency response the square of
whose Ttiagnitude is given by

N where ss the order of the filter. From eq. (9.140)^ we would like to determine the system

We function Bis) that gives rise to |5(7fti>p.

first note d?at, b> definition.

|B(£P - Bijo>)B*ijo>).

(9.141)

704

The Laplace Traosform

Chap. 9

If we restrict Ihe impulse response of the Butterworth lilter la be real, then from the prop-
erty of tionjugaie symmetry for Fourier transforms.

5*e£ = B{-jail

(9.142)

so thiit

B(ji^)B{-jw) - -- --J- ^---^^

(9.143)

Ne?ti, we note that È(j)[^ -y^ - 5{jw), and consequently, frrim eq. (9,143>,

a{s)B(-s) - -----i---- , 1 f {sijtf}fY^

(9.144)

The roots of the denominator polynomia] corre<iponding to the combined poles of 5<5)B("j>areat

s ^ (-j)i^'^(yt^j. Equation (9145) is satisfied for any value s - Sj, for which

(9.145)

\sp\ - w.

(9.14(^)

and

that is,

<V = j^

^,

^an integer;

j,, ^ -w^. exp;

^r(2J^+_0
+ 77/2

(9.147; (9.148)

N In Figure 9,28 we illustrate the ptisitjons of the poles of BU)B{-s\ for

=

\> 2, 3, and 6. In general, the following observatioriij can be made about these poles:

1. There are 2N poles equally spaced in angle on a circle of radius (l}^ in the j-plane. 2- A pole never lies on the /to-axis and occurs on the tr-ajnis for A^ odd, but not for
A" even
3* The angulai spacing between the poles of B{s)Bi^-s) is ttJN radians.

To determine the poles of fi(j) given the poles of Bis)B{--s), wc observe thai the

= poks of B{s)B{ -j) occur in pairs^ so that if there is a pole ai s

ar^, then there is also

a pok at 5 ^ -sp. ConE^equcntly, lo construct His), we choose one ptik from each pair

If we restrict ttie systetn to be stable and fr^usal, then the poles that we associate with

S(i) are [he poles along die sernicircle in the lefl-hiilf plane The pole locations specify

fi(j>onlytowithinascale factor However, froraeq. (9.144), weseethat5^(j)|^ o - l,or

equivalemly, from eq. (9.140), the scale factor is chosen so that the square nf the magnitude

¨ of the frequency response has unity gain at = 0.

^ = To illustrate the determination of Bix), let us consider die cases

= \.,^'

2, and

N = ^An Figure 9.28 we showed the poles af B\s)B{-s), as obtained from eq. (9. 148),

Sec. 9 7

Analysis and Characterization of LTI Systems Using t^e Laplace Transform

705

^r4

^ ~"
/
r

1
^

ñ^

.

__

N=1
\
X--
(R, /
y

a Tl-

W=2

XX ^^ r^ X -^\ I

y \ /

^V

\ i

^^

/ ;-
/\ \

{R^

X
/

^-

X

^£*

N=3

\
X-

^

/^

-^X ^

3

;\/-,

',/\; x^ ,x

/

\

= Figure 9.2S W Position Of the poles of ff^s}fi(-sf for 1,2, 3, and 6,

In Figure 9.29 we show the poles associated with E{s) for each of these values of /V. The
corre.^poxidi ng transfer functions are:

N = -- 1:

Bis) =

fct,.

(9.149)

N =-- 2: N =- 3:

B(s) =

¨-!

+ (j + Wrf^<^''-^>XJ (Ur^"-^'"^^')

=

^?

J^ -f ^kVc^ + tf^

BU) =

-?

+ + + (j M/,)Cs Wcf-'^'^'^'Ki" >Vce"'f*^^-'^0

^

-^

+ (j + WcX^^

+ t*^cJ

W'"?)

-.^

(9.150) (9.151)

Based on the discussion in Section 9.7.3, from B{s) we tan determine the associated
linear constant-coefficient difTereotial equation. Specifically, for the foregomg three valu&s

706

S7r%. j^^t

N=1

tS* V

The Laplace Transform

Chaj). 9

-UJr.V

N=2
j(U,
(ft.

X
r

J<i>C

N=3

{ft^
^x_

Figure 9,Z9

W ^ Posilion of the poles trf fl(s) tor

1, 2, and 3

of ^, the corresponding difTetentiaL equations are:

N ^ \\
N = 2:

^^ "^^y^^ ^ <^c^{t)\

^ ^ W5...

^ .?M0 = -;^0;

N=^: ^Uj^^^2^^ 2^t-^ ^ 0.? = .]m-

(^.152) (9 153) (9.154)

9.8 5YSTEA/I FUNCTION ALGEBRA AND BLOCK DIAGRAM JTEPRESEIVTATJON5

The usf. of ihe Laplace transfonn aJIows tJ> to replace lime-dom^n operations such a&

We differentiation, convolution, time sJiifttng, and so on, with algebraic operations.

have

already steii many of the benelits of this in terms of analyzing LTI sysleiris, and in this

section we t^ke a look at another important use of system fanction algebra, nanriely, in

analyzing interconnections of LTI systems and synthesizing systems as interconnections

of elementary system building blocks.

S¨c. 9,8

SyslGiTi F^n^ion Algebra and Block Diagram Representations

707

9.8, T System Functions for Interconnections of LTl Systems
Consider the parallel interconrection of two syst&mst as shown in Figure 9.30(a). The
impulse response of the overal) systetri is

hit)= h\U) + h2{f).

(9.\55)

and from the linearity of th& Laplace transfonn.
His) = H^[s) + H2{sX

(9.156)

Siinilarlyt the impul^ response of the series interconnection in hlgure 9-30(b) is

hit)= kM*h2(Tl

(9.157)

and the associated system function is
il(s) = Hi(s)H2is).

(9.158)

x(t)

hi{t)

*-y[t)

<aj

x{t)

hi(t} Hi(s)

H^fs)

*- y(n

Figure 9.30 (a) Parallel intp:rcon-

nection of two LTl systems: ^b) series

(b)

combinatian ol two LTl systems

The utility of the Laplace transform in representing combinations of linear systems

through algebraic operations extends to far more complex interconnections than the simple

parallel and aed^a combinations in Figure 9.30. To iDustrate this, consider the feedback
interconnection of two systems, as indicated in Figure 9.31 . The design, applicationsi^ an<i

^inaEysis t>f such interconnections are treated in detail in Chapter 1 1. While analysis of the system in the lime domain is not particularly simple, determining the overall system hinc-

tion from input x(() to output ^(0 is a straightforward algebraic manipulation. Specifit:ally. from Figure 9.31,

Ë{s) = Hi{s)E(sl

(9.159)

E(x) = X[^) -ZisX

(9J60)

708

xft)

^"
;r^ "I^ J *\ Hits)

T:]^ Laplace Transform

Chap 9

sfiA

m
H,fs}
{a}

from which we obtain the reUlion

or

Figure 9.31 Feedback intercorrnectjon oJtwo LJI Si^stems
(^.ifi])
^9A62)
(9.163)

9-8.2 B}ock Diagram ;7epre5entation5 for Causal LTf Systems Described by Differential Equations and Rational System Functions
In Secddn 2.4 ^i, we illustrated the block ditigram representation of an LTl syiLem doscnbed by a first^rdcr differential equation usmg the basic operations of addilioii. jnuiti-
plicalicin by a c^oefficient, and integration. Theiie sancie three operations :;an aliO be used
to build block di*igrams for higher order systems, and in this section we iUustrnte this in
several esaraplcs.
Example 9.28
Consider (he cau.sjtl LTl system with "iy-Slem fund ion

His)

=

^
s + 3"

From Section Q.7.3, we Jtncw that this system can also be desi^ribed by th& difterential
equation

+ 3>(r) = xiA

together witi [hecoiidnicnof irutia! rtibt. In Section 2.4.3 we ct>nstructi?da block diagmm

representation^ sliown in Figure 2,32. foia first-nrder system such as thi^. An equiva-

U lent block diagram fcon-eiponding to Figure l.yi with a = .T and b =

is shown in

Sec. 9.B

System Function Algebra and Block Diagfam Represeiialions

x(t}

Vr7\ ^^** £

&

£- ytn

709

x{i}

e fe{t)

*- y(t)

Figure 9,3Z (a) Block diagrann representation of the cau&ai LTI system in
Example 9 28; (bj equivalent bloclt diagram reprssenMFon.

Figure 932(a). HeiCj 1/j is the system function of a system with impulse response u(tX
i.e., it is the system function, of an integrator Also^ the sysrem functioD -3 in the feed-
back path in Figure 9-32Va) corresponds to multiplicatLoD hy the coefhcient --3. The block diagram in the. figure involves a feedback loopmucti as we considered in the previous liubscction and as pictured in Figure 9-31, the sole difference being that the two
MgnaJi that are the inputs to the adder im Figure ^,32(a> are added, rather than <iubtracted as in FiguTe93l. However, as illustrated in Figure 932(b), by changing thtsign
of the coefficient Lti the multiplication in the feedback path^ we obtain a block diagram representation of exactly the sssne^ form as Figure 9,31. Consequently, we can apply
eq, f9.163) to verify that

h{s) =

1/a

1 +3^;^

1
J + 3'

Example 9.29
Consider now the causal LTI system with system function

(9,164)

As suggested by eq. (9.164)^ this system can be thought of as a cascade of a system with system function !/(.; + 3) followed by a system, with system function s -*- 2, and

710

Ttie Laplace Transform

Chap. 9

we have illustrated this in Figure 9.33{a). in which we have u&ed the block dia.grain in + Figure 9.32fa) to represenr V(s 3)_
It [<> aiso possible to obtain an alternative block djagrain repreti¨iitaii<in for the system in eq. (9.164). Using the lirw^tj and differeQtiatioo properries of the Laplace
transform, we know that y[t} and zU) iJi Figure ?,31(a) are t^lated by

^ ,(0 .

+ 2m.

However, the input e{0 to the integrator iR e>tact]y the derivative of the output z(r), so
that

which leads directJy to the alternative block diagram tepresentation shown in Figure 9,33(b>. Note that the hlott diagram in Figure 9.33(a) requires the dJITeientiaiLon of
ziO' since

In contract, the block diagram in Figure 9.33(b) docs not involve the explicit differcnliatioa of any sigiml.

j(jt)

c^J

eft)

^i

1

-a

m ^
1 1 1 1
1 1

s+2

tal
H1

*- t'(t£

Y<,V

G> JtW -

e(t^

iir

-3 ^-
{b)
Figure 9-33 (a) Block diagram representations tor the system in Exam^ pie 9.29; (b) equivalent biMk diagram representatior.

Sec 9.8

System Function Algebra and Bbck Diagram Representations

Example 9.B0
Ci^nsider ncKl a caus.a1 second-order system with system. function

711

{s + IXj +2) J- + 3j + 2
The input A(f) and output v(/) f^>r this syfvtem satisfy the difTeiential e^juation

^^^,'m^2yi,)^..Ul

(9.166)

By employing simUM ideas to those used in the preceding examples, we obluin the bt<?ck
diagram representation for this system shoun in Figure ?.34<a;i. Specilically, sLnc¨ the

K^t)

o) J

^*'^ £ *

m

L

-1

L
Kt)

m 1 s
T
-3
Y\U^'^
{a}
o

Ë(t)
T
-!
-ñ- y{^)

(b>
D-
-1 -*

-2
Q *- yW

-1
G>
-i -*
(0
Hgure 9*34 Block diagram representaiions for the sysitera in Exam-
ple 9.30^ (a) direct form; (b) cascade form; (c) parallel form.

712

The Laplace Transform

Chap .

9

input to an integrator ii; tke derivative of ihe output of the integratoTH the ^i^nals in the
block dia^rmn uie relitted by

f(.0 =

HI) = dfir) ^ d-v{t}

dt

di

Also, eq. (Q.I 66) can berewnttcn as

^^-^^-2y,^..n.

or

which ts exactly ^^'hat is represented in Hgure 9,34(a), The block djagram in this figure is sometiiiies referred to as a direct-form repre-
m servtaiioti, \\kv^^ the coefficieniS app&aring the diagram can be direcTl^ identitied with
the coefficients appearing in the system function or, equivalently, itie difTerentjaJ equation Other bloclE diegr^m representations of practical importance also can be obtained after a mode&l amount of system fuikction algebra. Specifically, His) in eq. (9.165) can
b^TewriittTi as

which su^gebts thai thit system can be represented aj? the cascade of two first -order systems. The rfliNfd^^-^rm representation corresponding to /f(.f) is sihown in Figure 9 34(b).
Alternatively, by performing a parual-fraciion expansion of /J(^). we obtam
which leads tn Lhe^ pt^ra^ff^/ofm representation d-jpicttd in Figure ^.IrMs^-
Exampje 9.31
As a final t\i(mple, COtisidei th* sy stein function
Once ag^n, Rising system function algebra^ we can write H{s) in several different tormSj each [jf which suggeAt.<h a bloclc di^gjam reprcseniation, In particular, we can wriie
-- HU) = {- [ ^ V^" + 4i - 6)
which suggests the reprewntaEion. of //(j) ai the cascade of the system depicted in. Fig-
tire 9.34fa) and the syiptem with system function 2j^ -h- 4j -- 6. However, exactly as we

3¨[;-9.3

Sy$Utn Fitnction Aigebr^and Block Daigrann Representation &

713

did in h^ampte 9-^9h we tan extract ihe dtjtivativt^ required frtT this SLrcontj sy¨;teirL by "tapp.ng^' the signals appearing as the- Inpu-S to the integrators in the lirst sy?ttcm The detaik v^ this conj,[ruction :ire ejtamined in Problem 9,^6, and tht rei.uh is (he dsrectfnrm Hotk diagram sho^i'n in Figure ?.3Sr Onte ii^ain, in the diretl-ftirm representation the euefficients appearing in the bluck diagram can be determined by inspection from
I he Cdcfficienls in the sy.stcm functiori in eq. f9. 167).

*- V(t)

Figure 9.35 Direct-foinn reprise ntatron for the system in Example 9 31.

Alternatively, we can write W{j^ in tbf form

¨,., . i^iz^^f^ - ^
s + 2 i\s-\-]

;9.l6fi)

or

= H\.s)

6 2 -H

J+2

8
J 4- 1

(9 169)

rhe first of these iuggeMs a ca^ade-form representation, while the secctnd leads to a parallel-ibrm block diagram. These art also tonsidcied in Problem 9 .16

The methods for corLfiiructing block diagratnrepr^iientaiions for causal LTI systems described by differentiiil et^uations and rationa] system functions can be applied equally
we3l to higher ofder systems. In addition, there is often considerable flexibility in how this is done. For example, by reversing the tiumerators in eq. (9.16S), we can write

which stiggests a different cascade fortii. Abo, as illustrated in Problem 9.3S, a fourthorder system function can be written as the prodiictof two second-order system functions, each of which can be represent^ in a number of ways (e.g,, direct fbrm^ cascade, or parallel), and it can also be written as the stjm t>f lower order terms, each of which has sev-
eral different representations. In this way, simple low-order systems can serve as huilding blocks for the implenieniation of more cornplcx^ higher crder systems.

.

714

The Laplace Transform

Chap. 9

9.9 THE UNILATERAL LAPLACE TRANSFORM

In Lhti preceding sections of this chapter, we hdve dealt with what is commonly called the bilateral Laplace transform. In ihls section, we introduce and examine a somewhal
m different tran^fomi, the unilateral Laptfite tratisform, which is (if considerable value
analyzing causal systems and, particularly, systems specified by linear c^>rstant- coefficient difrerenti:il equations with nonzero initial i.onditions (i.e., systems that are not initially at
rest).
The unilateral Laplace transfomi of a continuous-time signal x{t\ is defined as

3C(.) i
JO

where ihe lower limit of integration,

. sigriifies that wc include in the interval of

integration any impulses or higher order singularity functions concentrated at f = 0.

Otiee again we adopt a convenient shorthand notation for a signal and its unilateral

Laplace transform:

-- = x{f) * ^ eCi J)

tiÈj xU)\

(9. 17 n

Comparing eqs, (9.170) and (9.3), we see that the difference in the definitions of

the unilateral and bilateral Laplace transform lies in the lower limit on the integral- The bilateral tmnsfomi depends on the entire signal from ^ - - ctto/ ^ +^, whereas the uni-
= lateral transform depends only on the signal from / 0~ to^. Consequently, two signals
< thai differ for^ 0, but that are identical for : ^ 0, will have diffetvni bilateral Laplace

transforms, but identical unilateral transforms. Similarly, any signal that is identically /^ro
< for t Ohas iderttit:al bilateral and unilateral transforjns.

Since the unilateral transform of Mf) is identical to the bilatera; transform of the
< signaJ tibtaincd from xO) by settitig its value to for alW 0, many of the injiight.s.

concepts, and results pertaining to bilateral transforms can be directly adapted to the

unilateral case. For example, using Property i in Sectlott 9.2 for right-sided signals^

ROC we see that the

for eq. (9.170) is always a ngKi:-half plane. The evaluation of

the inverse unilateral Laplace transfomis is also the same as for bilateral transfonns,

ROC WEth the constraint that the

for a umlateral iransfonn must aIway^ be a rigtit-half

plane.

9.9. 1 Examples of Unilateral Laplace Transforms
To illustrate the unilateral Laplace transform, let us consider the following examples:
Exannpfe 9.32
Consider the signal

^<^*=
7

rTTf"'"M(0.

in - i>:

(9.172^

5

SeC- 9 9

The UniLateraL Laplace Tran$fortvi

T1

Sinci; xU) --
Table 9,2.

< fot r 0, ihi^ unilateral anU bilateral Eransforms are identical. Thus, froin

Example 9.33

4r) ^ e-"^'-""u{r + 1>.

(9.174)

Tt^ fi* iflreri3^ tTansform K<e) for this sK^mple can be Dbuined from Example ^A and the
timc-shifring property (Section 9,5.2):

XU) - -^.

+ J

fl

By ctjntrust, the unilateral transform is

> G{^,^) -IX.

(:9,17i)

Thus, in this example, the unilateral and bibtera] Laplace transforms are clearly Jjf-
ferent. In fact, we should recognize 3C<j) a& the bilateral transform not of xU), but of x{i}u{t), consistent with our earlier" comment that the unilateral transfonn in the hilateral
< transform ufa sigriiit whose values fur i 0" have been set to zero.

Example 9.34

Consider the signal

xii) = 3(1} + 2ui(0 + e'u{i)

(9.177)

< Since xl,i) = for f 0, and since singularilies at the origin are included in the initrva]
of integration, the laillater^l transform for x(.s) is the same a.s ttie bilateral transform-
Specifically, lising the fact (transfonn pair 15 in Table 9.2) that the bilateral trrmsfcnri i^i u,,{i) i^s^.vjc have

-^ a:(j) = X(5) = 1 + 2s +

- s(2s- I)

s- I

s- I

^^^^^ ^ ^

^^^^^^

Example 9.35
Consider the unilateral Laplace transfonn

716

TliB Laplace Yransform

Chap 9

[ti Example 9.^^ wc c\?nsidertd the inverse trdnsfomi for a bilateral LapJace trar.sfonnnof

m the exact form ai^ that cq,(^-17t>)aJidfor -qevcral ROCji Fwr (he unilaitrul transform,

ROC the

must be the righ^ -Vialf pUnt lo ttve ri^hi of ihe rightmost pole uf OC(j). i.e., in

ROC > We tfiii ca-ie, the

a>nsiMi of all puints a with <P.-^{s}

-1.

can (hen invert ihis

unil-atera] transform cxacil> as iti Exaniple ^ 9 ty obtain

- > - JcO}

ic '

e '']u(t} for r

D",

{*>, ISO)

where we have emphasized the fact that unilateral Laplace transforms provide us wilh
> in;orniation about signak only for J i)\

Exampfe 9,36
Consider the unilateral tran^ft>rm

^{^)- '-^^.

(9.1KI)

Since The degree of the numerator of !X(j) is not strictly less than (he decree ot the de-
nominator, we expand ÈC(j_i ai

^is)

=

A

+

Bs-t

-^.
J +2

(9.182}

Equating eqs. (9. ISI) and<9.1R2), and cleaning denominators, we aht^in
C J- - 3 = (A -t Bx)i!f + 2j +

(9.1Bi)

and equating c[>efl]tients for each power of i yields

^, X{s)= -2 + S+ J -I- J.

(9.184)

ROC with an

of{R*{.tJ > -2. Taking inver'^ tnmsforms of each term results in

= > jf(0

-2^(0 + ui(i\ + e -'u{0 for t 0".

(9.185)

9,9.2 Properties of the Unilateral Laplace Transform

As with the bilateral Laplace traitsfflrm, the unilateral Laplace Iransform has a number of

iiviporiani properties^ many of which are the same as vhcir bilaieial counterpans and sev-

eral of which differ in f^igniiicant ways. Tabic 9.3 suminarife^ these properties. Note that

ROC we have not included a coluinn ejtplicitly identifying the

for the unilaieral Laplace

ROC transfortn for each signal, since the

of any unilateral l^place tranftfonn is always a

ROC right-half plane. Forexampletbe

for a rational ut^ilateral Laplace transfortn is always

tt> the right i>f the rightmost pole

Contrasting Table 93 with Table 9.1 for the bilateral transform, we see that, with the caveat that ROCs for uoilateral Laplace transforms are always ri^t-half planes, the

linearity, j-d&main shifting, time-scaling, conjugation and tliffererttiation in the j-domain

J

Sec. ^.9

The Unilateral Laplaoa Transfarm

TABLf 9.3 PROPERTIES OF THE UNILATERAL LAPLACE TRANSFORM

Froperty

Signal
MO
jfi(r-i
XiU)

UnlUteraJ Laplace l^tufortu
a:,tj>
X2is\

Linearity

OJ|(0 + bX2{l^

oaCiiJj + ^Xjtj)

Shirting in the f-damain

^Vj(f)

- 'HCis si))

Time scaling

j:{uf>,

> fl

CunjugaUon

CuHvulution (assuming

that x\U) and x^it)

arc identically jjero for

< 1

0)

Din^creDtititi-Dii in the time domain

J'(0
Ji0)*jf3(fl

x*{i)
aCit.viEt.m
sSCtj)- ;tf(]-)

- Diffcrentiati-nn in the
j-domain

-fji/)

^^(^'

J-
rntefratLon in the time domaLii

Initia]- and Final- Value Theorems
If x(0 ULi^tains no impulses or higher-urdcr singjilanties at / = 0, then

jr{0^>= limrirCj)
J--'3

^ hm lim ;t(j)

jÈC(s>

717

properties are identical tt> their bilateral countBrpaits. Similarly, the initial- and final-value theorems stated in Section 9.5. 10 also hold for unilateral Laplace transforms. "^ The derivation of each of these properties is identical to that of its bilateral counterpart.
The convolution property for unilateral transforms also is quite similar to the corre-
spending property for bilateral transforms. This property states that if

x\{t) = j:2(/) =

< for all t 0,

{9 Am

^ In fact, the initia] - and tinal-valiie thenrems are bAsically udilalera] transform pro|)cnj4;i^ as they apply
< only to signals xit) tbat air identically for f 0.

718

The Laplaoe Translarin

Chap. 4

then

xM*^2it)^^Xi(sj3:2is\

(9.187)

Equation (9, 137) fciUows imm^iately firQui the bilateral convolution property, since, under the condiaons of eq. <9.186), the unikteraJ and bilateral transforms are identical for each

of the signals Jfi(^) and x^it). Thus, the system analysis tools and system function algebra

developed and used in this chapter apply without change to unilateral transforms, as long
as we deal with causal LTi systems {for which the system function is both the bilateral
and tht unilateral transform of the impulse response) with inputs that are id&ntically zero
< < for f 0. An exatitple of this is the integradon property in TahJe 93: IfJiit) = forr 0,
then

^ x(T)dT = x(i)*.u(t)

3C(s)ti(*) = -X{s)

it-

J

(9.i8S)

As a second case in point, consider the following example:

Example 9.37

Suppose a causal LTI system is describe by the diiferential equation

m^^d_^^2yi,)^m.

(9.189)

together with the cundition i^f ioitial rest. Using eq, f9-133), we find that the system
ftincnon for this system is

Let the input to this system be x(t) =- Qip(t), In this case, the uniliteral ^and hilatenil) Lepl3ce tiansform of the output yit) is

Vis) = :H(s}X<j} ^

+ + !i{s

l)(ff

2)

flj/2

a + --a--/,2.

s

+ j-H 1

J 2'

^ Applying Example 9. 32 to eath term of . (9. 1 9 1 } yiel<is

(9.1Q1)

2-^-^r"' yiO = ^ 1

_-

1

u(t}.

(9A92)

It is importanL to note that the convolution propetiy for unilateral Laplace transforms
< applies only if the signals Xi{i) and ^2(0 in eq. (9.187) aie bodi zero for t 0. That is,
while we have seen that the bilateral Laplace transform of xtU) * X2it) always equals the
product of the bilateral transforms of ;ci (0 and 13(0. the unilateral transfoim of jti (/)* ^^(rl
in general does ntff equal the product of the unilateral imnsfbrms if either X] {t) or xzit) is
nonzero for r < 0, (See, for example. Problem 939).

Sec. 9.9

The Unilateral Laplace Transform

719

A particularly important difference between the properties of the uniJateral and bi-
lateral transfortns is the differetitialioti property. Consider a signal x{t) with unilateral
Laplace traosfonn 3C(j), Then, integrating by parts, we find that the unikteral transform
f>fdx(iVdt is given by

'''^'K-"dt = me-" ,,.^1^^'"'"'''

MO = j3C<j) -

).

(9.,93>

Similarly, a second application of this would yield the uttilateral Laplace transform of

- j"3C(j> - sx{ii-) x'iU \

(9,194)

= where j:'(0 ) denotes the derivative of x(0 evaluated dXt i}~ . Clearly, we can continue
the procedure to obtain the unilateral transform of higher derivatives,

9.9.3 Solving prfferential Equations Usirtg the Unilateraf Laplace Transform

A primary use ^>f the unilateral Laplace transform is in obtaining Ehte solution of lioear

We constant-coefficient differential equatiotis with nonzero initial conditions.

illustrate

diis ]n the following example:

Exampfe 9.33

Consider the fiystein charactenzed by the differential equation (3. 1 89) with initial con-
ditions

yfO

= )

^.

yXO") = y.

(9J95>

Let x{i) -- au{tX Then, applying the unilateral transforro to both sides of eq. <9,189), we obtain

or

is + IXj + 2) (s + 2)U + 2) sis + 2)(s -h 2/

^

^

where y^j) is the unilateral Laplate nansform of y{i).
Referring to Example 9,31 and, in particular, to eq. (9.191), we set: that the last
lerm on the ri^t-hand side of eq. (9.197) is precisely the unilateral Laplace transform
of the response of the system when the initial conditions in eq. (9,195) are hoth zero
(^ ^ y ^ 0). Tha[ is, the last term represents the response of the eziusal LTI system
destribedbyeq. (9J8Q)and theconditirtn of initial rest. This rciponseis often referred

720

Tlifl Laplace Transform

Chap. 9

-- to as. the zero-staii respoTise i.e., tht tes^ponse when the lOitial slate (the set of iTkitial
ciJDdition.^ in eq. (9-195)) is zero.
An analogous interpretatioji applies to the: hrst two terns on Ch-e right-hand side ol^ eq. (9. 197). 1Tk:¨ teims represent the unilater^ transform of the response of the sy^em when (he input is zero <a = 0), This lesponse is tommonly referred to as the zeto-
input rfspotLfc. Nf>tt that the zero-iaput response is a bnear function of the values of
the initial conditions {e,g.£ doubling the values of both ^ and y doubles the zero input
re&ponj^e). PurthermCTe, eq (9.197) illustrates an important fact about the solution of
linear toostanl-ooefficient dLffeneTitial equations with nonzero initial conditions, namely,
th^t the overall resporii^e is simply the superpositton cf the zero-state and the zeio-input
responses. The zero-btate response is the response obtained by setting the initial candi-
-- liyns to iiCn> i.e.^ it is the response of an LTI system defined by the differeDtia] equa-
tion and the coadition of initjaJ nest. The lero-input response is the response to die initial cDoditioiL^ with the input set to Hfio. Other examples illustrating this cEUi be Found in
PtDbletni 9.20. 9.40, and Q.66.
Firiaily, fbrariy values of a, ^,and7, we can£ of course, expand ^^(j) in eq, (9. 197}
inapartial-ftactioncspatisLonandinverttoobtain y<0-Foreitample, if a = 2, ^ = 3. and y = --5, then perfomung a piutial-fractioti eKpaitsion foreq, (9.197^ we find that

Applying Example 9,32 to each tenn then yields
y{t) = [1 - e-' + 3^-^Xf) for > t 0.

(9/199)

9.10 SUMMARY
In this chapter, we Itave develop&i aiid studied the Laplace transform, which c^n be viewed
as a gener^ixation of the Fourier transform. It is particularly useful as an analytical tool in the analysis and study of LTI systems- Because of the properties of Laplace transforms, LTI
systems, including those represented by line^u- constant-coefficient difTerential equations,
can be characterised and analyzed in the tran^fonn dotnain by algebraic jnanipulations. In addition, system function algebra provides a convenient tool both for analyzing interconnections of LTI systems and for constructing block diagram tepresentations ofLTI systems dE^scnbed by diffetenhal equations.
For signals and systems with rational Laplace transforms, the tratisform is often conv&nienfly represcinted in the complcj; plana (j-platw) by marking the locations of the poles
and zeros and indicating the r&gion of convergence. From the pole-zeio plot, the Fourier
transfrain can be geometrically obtained, within a scaJitig fact<^^ Causality, stability, and oiber characteristics are also ea.sily identified from knowledge of the pole locations and the region of convergence.
In this chapter, we have been concerned primarily with the bilateral Laplace trans-
form. However, we also introduced a somewhat different form of the Laplace transform known as the unilateral Laplace transform. The unilateral transform can b<e interpreted as
the bilateral transform of a signal whaae values prior to / = 0~ have been set to zcrc.
'Hiis form of the Laplace transform is especially useful for analyzing systems described by linear constant-coefficient differential eqiiations with nonzero initial conditions.

Chap, 9

Prodtems

721

Chapter 9 Problems

The first section of problems belongs to the basic category, and the answers are provided in the back of the book. The remaining three sections contain problems belonging
to the basic, advanced, and extension categories, respectively.

BASIC PROBLEMS WITH ANSWERS

9A. For each of the following integral^ ?;pecify Ihe values of thereat parameter*/ which

ensure that the integral converges

(a) L"f-^V^^'J¨'Vr If)

(b) f"^f 5;^-(^4-j¨]^jr

(D f" ^--^'È'-f^^^^^''J'f/r
9.2. Consider the signal
= xO) e ^'\t'uO- IX
and denote its Laplace transform by X{s). (a) Using eq. (9. 3), evaluate XCv) and specify its region ^)f convergence.
fb) Etetermine the values of the finite numbers A and ti^ such that the Laplace trans-
form G(s) of

has the same algebraic form as X(s]. What is the region of convergence corre-
sponding to 6(.5)?
yj. Consider (he signal

and denote it^ Laplace transform by X(s). What are the constraints placed tin ihe
> real and imaglnajy parts of ^ if the region of convergence ot\Y(^) is(R*^{5} -?7
9*4, For the Laplace Lransfnrm in

j:(0 =

e' sin 2i, 0,

r^
( >0

indicate the Ick^ation of its poles and its region of convergence.
9*5* For each of the following algebraic cxprcssioni for the Laplace transform ofa signal. detetminc the number of /ero.s located in the finite j-planc and the number of zeros
Iccated at infinity:

*^*7;i^-T^
s+ 1

722

The Uplace Transform

Chap. 9

=2 9.6. An absolutely integruble signal x(e} is known to have a pole at j

Answer the

following questions^

(a) Could Jt(;) be of finite duration?

(b) Could :r(/)bÈ left sicjed?

<c> Could x{t) be right sided?

(d) Could ^U) be tWH3 sided?

9*7, How many signals have a Laplace transform that may be expressed as

(j-1)

in Its region of convergence?

9.S. Let jfCr) be a signal that has a rational Laplace transform with exactly ivro poles,
located all - -1 ands = -3, lfg<.t) = È^'x{t) andG(;w) Itiie Fourier transform
of git)] converges, delermiTK whether x{t) is left sided, right sided, or two sided,
9*9, Given that

*^ -- e-"'u(t)

L-.

J+a

determine the inverse Laplace transform of

(R*H ><H*{-(i>,

9JO, Using geometric evaluation of the magnitude of the Fourier transform from the corresponding pole-zero plot, determine, for each of the follo\ving Laplace transforms, whether the magnitude of the conesponding Fourier transform is approximately
lowpass, highpass, or bandpass:
^^>^'^^^=(7Ti)W-3)^ *^^>"-^

9A1. Use geometric evaluadon fn>m the pole- zero plot to determine the magnitude of the Fourier transform of the signal whose Laplace transform is specified as
9, 12* Suppose we are given the following three facts about the agniU x{i):
L x(t) = Oforf < 0.
2. xik/m) = OfQrk ^ \, 2, 3 3. ;c(in60> - tr-i^,
Lat Jf(i ) denote th& Laplaoe transform of r(0. and determine which of the following statements is consistent with the given information about xit): (a) X(s) has only one pole in the finite j-plane. <b) ^(.Ë> has only two poles in the finite j-plane. (c> X(.y) has more than two poles in the finite J-plane.

.

Chap. 9

Problems

9.13. Let

where

= g{t)

x{r) + aji(-t),

72S

and the Laplace transform of g{{) is
J* -- 1
Determine the valuer of Che cotisiants or and 0. 9.14. Suppose die following facts are given ^xiut the signa] x(f) with Laplace transform
Xis):
L x{t) is real and even.
2. Xisy has four pole& and no zeros in the finite j-plane,
- 3. y(j) has a pole at.? (l/2)eJ^^^
Determine X{s) and its ROC.
9.15. Consider {wo right-sided signals x(t) and y(t) related through the differential equa-
tions

at

dtid

dy(t) - 2x{zy
dt

Determine Yis) and X(s), aLong with their regions of convergence.

A LH 9.16. causal

system S with impulse response k(t) has its input x{t^ and output >(;)

related through a linear constant-coefficient dtfTerential equadon of the form

(a) If
how many poles does C(sl have? (b) For what real values of the parameter cr is 5 guaianieed to be stable?
A 9.1 7. causal CTI systetn S has the block diagram representation shown in Fi gure P9 1 7
Determine a differential cquatinn relating the input t(/) to the output yyt) of this system.

724
xft)

The Uplace Transform Chap 9

<D-

*-y(tj

-4

Figure J*9. 1 7

9.18. Consid*iT tht cau&iil LTI system repres^nVed by Vhe HLC circuit examine*! in Prob-
lem 3.20. ^a) Determine ff{s} and specify iU region of convergence. Your answer should be
consistent -w^ith the fact that the ay.stem is causal aiid sLable.
fb) losing the poJe-zero pJflt of ^(j) and geometric evaluatior of the magnitude of the Fourier transform, determine whether the magnitude of the corresponding Fourier transform has an approximately lowpass, higJipass, or bandpass char-

acteristiL:.
(c) If the value of R is now changed to 10~^ O, determine H[i-) and specify its
region of convergetice,
(d) Using the pole-zero plot of H{x) obtained in part (c) aud geometric evaluation of the magnicude of the Fouriev traiisform, Jetemiine whether the magnitude erf the corresponding Fourier tran^^form has an approximately iowpass. highpass, orbandpa&s characteristic.

y.l9* Determine the unilateral LapSace transfiirni of each of the following signals, and

specify the corresponding regions of convergence:

(a) jc{i) - f ^'uO+ 1)

= + (b> xit}

+ &it -+ I) 5(0 e--^"^'->ui: + L)

920, Consider the RL circuit of Problem 3.19.
(a) Determiiie the zero-state response of this circuit when the input current is x{t) = e 2^w(/^
(b) Determine liie zero-input response of the circuit for f > 0~, given that

= y(C} )

1.

(c) I>eceniiine the output of the circuit i^hen the input current is x{X) = t"^'u(/)
and the initial condition is the same a^ the one j^pecified in part (b)

BASIC PROBLEMS

9,21. Etetennine the Laplace transform and the associated region of convergence and polezero plot for each of the following functions of tiine:

1

1

Chap, 9

Problems

72S

40 (f)

-= kk'^'^c-o

I,

^ ^ f

1

^ 0, elsewhere

^ ^ '

^ r, f
^ [ ^ -V,

^I^ 1 1 ^r^2

+ (i) xii) = Sii) uii)

(i) 41) = 5C3r) + u(iO

9*22. Detcmime the function of time, x(0, for each of the following Laplat^e transforms

and their associated regions of oonvergence;

(a)

> (R^{s]

(b)

< (R^{^}

(c)

^ _t

I

(d)

ht2 _

-4<fe{j}<-3

J4 I (e) T^ + ST'li'

-3 <(R^{j} < -2

(0

-J J-

-I-

(g)

> tR^{j} -

9.23, For each of the following statement* about x{t), and for each of the four pole-zero

plots in Figure P9-23, determine the corresponding constraint on the ROC:

1. x{t)e ^' is abso]ute;Iy integrable.

2, j:(0 * {e~'u{t)y is absolutely integr^ble,

f> 3. x(r) -^O,

I.

4, ;t(0 = a ^<: -I,

tfm

X

'2j

X

ftm

X

'2j

O

-2

2iR^

V

-^; X

-^

2jS*

X

L-^; O

^m

o

-2}

X

Int

O

-2j

O

-2

2 (R^

o

--2j X

-2

2CR*

o

O L 2j

Figure P9.Z3

--

72fc

The Laplace Ir^DS form

Chap. 9

9,24. Throughout thi^ problem, we will consider the region of convergence [>f the Laplace
transform!^ always to iDclude the jw-aixis. (a) Consider a signal x{0 with Fourier transform Xij'tii) and t^place triijisform
+ X{s) ^ J 1/2. Draw the pole-7,eto plot for X(s)^ Also, draw the veotoi" whose
length repreaentK |A"(jt(j>| and whose angle with ref;peci to the real axis repie-
sents <Jf(_/w) for a given o^.
(h) By exatnining the pole-zero plot and vector diagram in part (a), determine a different Laplace transform X^s) corresponding to the function of time, x\it}.
so thai
|X,(£| = \X{jio%

but
xi{:) ^ xU\
Show the pole-2ero plot and associated vectors that represent Xi(;iij).
(cj For your answer in part (b>, determine, again by examining the related vector diagrams, the relationship between 4iX(jti>) and *^X\\Jitj}.
<d) Determine a Laplace transfonn X2(s) such that
<X2iJ(o) = <X(^jti}),
but xjit) is mt proportional to Jt(r). Show the pole-zero plot for X:!^) and the
associated vectors that represent X2( ]**>). (e) For your answer in part (d), determine the relationship between A'2(/^)| and

(f) Consider a signal j:(r) with Laplace transform X{s) for which the pole -zero plot

is shown in Figure P9,24. Etetermine X^is;) such that \iXij<ft)\ = \X\(jiii)\ and

< aU poles and zeros of Jf i (j) are in the left-hal f of the s-plane fi e. , (K¨{j}

J,

Also, determine X2<s) such that ^Xijot) = <XAj^) and all poles and zeros

of Xiis) are in the left-halF of the j-p^ane.

^nt

^X" <y
-2

-O-X i1
2

~---
^*

Figure P9.24

9,25,

By considering the geometric determinaiion of the Fourier transfcffrriv as developed

in Section

9*4 ,

sketch,

for each

o f the

pole-zero

plots

in

Figure

P9 .25 ,

the

magni tude

of the assooiated Fourier cr&jisfonn.

-

Chap. 9

Protjlen^

"X---
tR*
0---lbio
^rn
--X-
(ft.

727
dm
Jt<^
^m

^Cl
^£*
i^'o
Iftc

fd) rfn<
(ft.

(f)
Figure P9.25 9J6, Consider a signal yU) which is reJated to two signals ji(0 and jr^^O by

where

j,(f) =^ f"^'M(0

and

J2<f) = f "^^u(f).

728
Given that

The Laplace Transform

Chap 9

use properties of the Laplace transform to <kiennire the Laplace tranjiform Yis) of

We ^.27£

are given the following five facts about a real signal x(j) with Laplacf: transform

1. X(i) has exactly two poles. 2- X{s) has no zeros in the finite j-plane.
3. X{s) has a pole at j = --1 + /
4. e-^xit) is not absolutely integrable,
5. X((£ = 8.
Determine XC^f) and specify its region of convergence.
9.28. Consider an LTl system for which the system function ff(s) has the pole- zero pattern shown in Figure P9,28,

rf£*

--^

X-

-2 -1

+1

+2 ^*

Figure M.2a

(a) Indicate all possible ROCs that can be associated with this pole-zero pattern.

ROC (b) For each

identified in part (a), specify whether the associated system is

scabk and/or causal.

9,29* Consider an LTI sysiem with input x{t) = e'^wCr) and impulse response A(r) =

(a) Determine the Laplace transforms of xU) and hit)(b) Using the convolution property, determine the Laplace transform Y(s) of the
output y(t).
(c) From the Laplace traiisform of y(;> as obtained in part (b), determine >-(/).
(d) Verify your result in part <b) by explicitly convolving xit) and hU).
A 9*30. pressure gauge that can be modeled as an LTT system has a time response to a
unit Step input given by (1 - *-"' - te~')u(t). ForAcertain input x(t), the output is - observed to be (2 3e "' -i- e~^')uit).
For this observed mcasuremeot+ determine the true pressure input to the gauge as a fi]iicdon of time.

cnap. 9

Problems

7J9

931- Consider a contimjous-time LTI system for which the input jttf> and output yir) are related by the differentia] equation

Let X{s) and y(j> denote Laplace transfonns of x{t) and yitX respectively, and let His) denote the Laplace transform of h{t)^ the system impulse response. la) D&temune H{sy as a ratio of two polynoniials in s. Sketch the pole-zero pattern

offf(j),

(b) Detenrtir^c ft(r) for each of the following cases:
1. The system ts stable. 2. The system is causal.

3. The system is neither stable ¨r?r causal.

A *>,32£ causal LTI system with impulse response hit) has the following properties:

When 1.

the input to the system is .t^f) = e^^ for all ^ the output is y{0 = (l/6)e^^

for all t.
2. The impulse response hit) satisfies the differenaal equation

dhU ) L

+

2hir)

=

ie~ '^'Mr)

+

huOX

dt

where È> is an unknown constant,
E>etermine the syHtem function Hix) of the system, consistent with die information
above. There should be no unknown constants in your answer; that is, the constant
b should not appear in the answer.
933. The system function of a causal LTI system is

Detemjine and sketch the respon&e yit) when the input is

" _x(t) ^ 1^

-& < f < ov.

&.J4. Suppose we are given the following information about a causal and stable LTI sys-

tem S with impulse respcm&e hit) and a rational system Unction His)

= 1- /f(l)

0,2,

2. When the input is ^(0, the output is absolutely integr^k.

3, When the input is tuii)^ the output is not absolutely incegrable.

4. The signal d^h(tydf + ZdhitWi + 2hU} is of finite duration.

5, His) has exactly one zero at infinity.

Determine ff(s) and its region of convergemce.

9,35, The input x{l) and output y(t) of a c^^usal LTI system are related through the bJockdiagrain representation shown in Figure P9.35. (a) Determine a differential equation relating y(() and x{ty (b) Is this system stable?.

73D

Mt)

<D

G>--

O
-^

The Laplaoa Tran$f orin

Chap, 9

ytt)

-1 *--* -6
J

Fi9ur¨ P9.35

936p In this problem, we consider the constnictiQn of varioLS types of block diagrajn representacLons for a cauJ^al LT[ system S with input xU)* output y{t\ and system
function

HU)^ s^ + 3S + 2'
To derive the direct-form block diagram representation of 5, we first consider a
causal LTl system S-\ that has the same input a(0 aA S, but whose system function
is

HM - .

1

With the output of 5, denoted by yi(0>ilie direct-form block-diagram representation

of Si is shown in Figure P9.36, The signals e(t) and f{t) indicated in the figure

represent respective inputs into the two integrators.

(a) Express y{t) (che output of 5) as a linear combination of yKO, dy^[t)fdt, and

d^y\Wdt^

(b) How is dy^Oydt rtlatcd to /{/)?

How (c)

is d^y^ itydt^ related to eit)!

(d) Express ^(0 as a Linear combination of i(t), /(O^ ^^^ >] (0

x(t}

e{t)
<D

1
3 1

m *1 s

' '
-3

yi{ti
'
-2

Figuf¨ P9.36

Chap. 9

Problems

73 T

(ft) Use the result from the previous part to extend the direct-iorm block diagram representation of Si and create a block diagram representation of 5.
(f) Observing that

s + 2 /\s Ë i
dr^w a bloek diagram rq>Tesentaticri for 5 as ^ ca^icade combination of two
subsystems. {%} Observing that
S+2 A + 1
draw a block-diagram representatioji for ^ a.s a parallel combination <if three
subsystems.
5J7^ Draw a direct-form represenwtion for the causal LTT systems with the following
sysiem functions;

938, Consider a fourth-order causal LTl system S whose system function is specified as

H{.y) -

I

(j2^s+ l)(*--i-2i + 1>

(a) Show that a block diagram representation for S consisting of a csu^cade of
four firsi-ord^r secdons will contain multiplications by coefficients that ate not purely real.
(b) Draw a block diagram representation for 5 as a cajicade interconnection of twn
second-ordej: systemji, each of which is represented in direct form. There should be no multiplications by nonreal coeiftciencs in the resulting block diagram.
(c) Draw a block diagram representation for 5 aii a parallel interconnection of two
second-order systems, each of which is represented in direct form. There should be no miflltiplicaiioiLS by nonreal coefficients in the resulting block diagram.
939. Ut

- ^,(0 È-'^u(/> and ^2(0 - e-^''^^^u{t + 1).

(a) Determine the uniiaieral Laplace transform ^iis) and the bilateral LapJace transform X\ (a) for the signal x\ it).
(b) Determine the unilateral Laplace transfonn 9^2 (^s) and the bilateral Laplace transform Xjis) for the signal ^^(f),
(t> Take the inverse bilateral Laplace transform of the product X\ {s^X^is) to deter-
mine the signal ^it) = jc\iO* ^:(0(d) Show that the inverse unilateral Laplace transfomi of the product 3C ] ( j)ÈCt U J
> is not the same as g(0 for f 0".
9M. CA>nsitlcr the system S characterized by the differential equ^ion

732

The Laplace TranstoFm

Chap. 9

(a) Determine the zero-state response of this system for the input ^(0 = ^ ^^it). (h> Detertnine the zero-input response of the system for r > 0~, giveji that

= y(0-:i

1,

dyU)

= -1.

-{)-

d^yiO
o df^ t

- 1.

= (c) Determine the tjutpat of 5 when the input is ;c(n e '''H(f> and the mitiaJ con-
ditions are the same as those specified in part (b).

ADVANCED PROBLEMS

= 9*41, (a) Show that, if jf(0 is an even function, so that -t(0

jf(-0,thcn Xts) ^ X{-s)^

(b) Show that^ if xi_f} is an odd funclion, so that xiO = --^{--0^ ^^^ -'^U) =

-X{-s).

(c) Determine which, if an>, of the po1e-?Èro ph^ts in Figure P9.41 could corresptmd
10 an even functio(n of time. For those that could, indicate the required ROC.

Sm

-X-1

-y

1

(R*

(a)
tfnj.

-Ch

-1

.l!f

(b)
^m

-X

-X"

1

(fl.

-1

(H.

QJ

(c)

(d)

Figure P9.+ 1

Chap. 9

Problems

733

AX 9

Determine whether each of the following statements is true or false. If a statement

is tnie. construct a cortvincing argument for it. If it is false, give a coumerexamp^e.

(a) The Laplace transform of t^u(t) does not converge anywhere on the j-pkne.

0^) The Laplace transform of e* uit) does not converge an>Tvherc on the j-plane, (c) The Laplace transform of e-f*^¯' does not converge anywhere on the j-plane.

(d) The Laplace transform of e^^¯'u{t} does not converge anywhere on the j-plane. (e) The Laplace transform of |?| does not cronverge anywhere on the j^-plane.

9AX Let h(t) be the impulse response of a causal and stable LTI system with a rational

system function.

(a) Is the system ^^ith impulse response dh{t)fdt guaranteed to hecausa] and stable?

(b) Is the system with impulse response \[:^h{T}d7 guaranteed to he causal and

unstable?

9,44* Let x{i) be the sampled signal specified as

> ^vhere 7 0,
(a) Deiermine Jf(j), including its re^on of convergence. (b) Sketeh the pole-zero plot for X{.sX (c) Use geometric mterpretadon of the pole-icro plot to aigue that Xijoj) is peri
odic.
9*45, Consider the LTl system shown in Figmxi P9.45(a) for which we are given the fol-
lowing information:
Xis) --

a x{f) =

f>a

and

ylO = --|^^u<-r) + Ae-'¨(f)u

fSee Figure P9 .45(b).]

(a) Determine His) and its region of convergence. Cb) Determine A(/).
y{t]

1^
*-y(t)
Figure P9.45

3
(b)

734

Til e Laplace Transform

Chaf) 9

(c) UsJDg the system function //<j) found in pan (a), determine the output y{i) if

the input is

-- < < 3P

/

+GC.

9.4t Let H(s) represcTit the system function for a causal, stable system. The input to
the system consists of the sum of three terras^ one of vthich is an impulse &{r) aiwj another a complex exponential of the form e^', where so is a complex constant. The
output is

A
y(t) = -6e + 'u<0 -f ^e"^' coÈ3f + ^^'^'sinBj' Hit).

DeteTTitine H{s), consistently with this information^
9*47, The signal
y{t) = e -^u{t)
is the output of a causal all-pass system for which the system function is
His) = s- I
i + 1"
(a> Find and .sketch at least two posH^ible inputs x{ty that couLd produce y<r). (b) What is the input x(t) if it is known that

\x{ty\dt<^i
I
(c) What is the input x{s) if it is known that a stable ^but not necessarily causal)
system exists that will have xit) as an output if yii) is die input? Find the impulse response h{t) of this filter, and show by direct convolution thai it ha^ the
property claimed li.e., thai y{t) * h{t) = jc(OL
9.48. TT\e inverse of an LIT sysiem H{s} is defined as a system that, when cascaded with HU), results in an overall transfer function of unity or, equivalently, an overall im-
pulse response that \^ an impuise.
(a) If Hiis) denotes the transfer function of an inverse system for /f(s), determine the general algebraic relationship between H{s} and //i(j).
(b) Shown in Figure P9,48 is the pole-zero plot for a stable, causal system H{s).
Determine the pote-zerq plot for the associated inverse system.

-1

i

2

Jl¨
Figure P9.48

.

Chap. 9

Problems

735

A 9.49. class of systems, referred to as minimum-delay or minimum-phase systems, is
sometimes defined through the statement that these systems are causal and stable and thai the inverse systems are also cau&al and stable.
Based on the preceditig definitiot), develop art ^ument to demonstrate that
all poles and zeros of the transfer function of a minimum-delay system must be in
< the left balf of the i-plane li.e,,tR^j} 0].

9-50. Determine whether or not each of the following statements about LTI systems I'i
true. If a statement is true, construct a convincing argtitmettt for it. If it is fiilse, ^i\e a counterexample.
A (a) stable continuous-time <iystem must have all its poles in the lefi half of the
j-planeli,e.,(RÈ{j}<OJ.
(b) If a ,<iystem function has more poles than zen>s, and the system is causal, the step response will be continuous at f = 0.
(c) If a system fiinciion has more p^^le.s than zeros, and the system is not restricted
= to be causal, the step response can be discontinuous at r 0.
A (d) stable, causal system must have all its poles and zeros in the left half of the
j-plane.

^.51*

Consider a stable and causal system with a real impulse response h(T) and system

function H{s).

It is known that H(s)

is

rational, one

of its poles

is

at

1

+

j,

one

of its zeros is at 3 -H 7 £ and it has exactly two zeros at infinity. For each of the

following statements, determine whether it la true, whether it is false, or whether

there is insufficient information to determine the statenient's truth,

(a) hU)e~^' is absolntely integrable,

ROC (b) The

> for Ii(s) is (R^e{s}

1

(c) The differential equation relating mputs x(t) and outputs y(0 for 5 may be writ-

ten in a form having only real coefficients.

= (d) Iim,^:.//(j)

1.

(e) H{s) does not have fewer than four poles.
(f) ti{jw) = for at least one finite value of w,

<e) If the input to S is e'^^ sin f, the output is e^' cos /.

9^2. As indicated in Section 9.5, many of the properties of d^e Laplace transform and

their derivation are analogous to corresponding properties of the Fourier iranfiform and their derivation, as developed in Chapter 4. In this problem, you are asked to
outline the derivation of a number of the ILaplacc transform properties.

Observing the derivation for the corresponding property in Chapter 4 for the Fourier tnmsform, derive each of the following Laplace transform properties. Your derivation must include a consideration of the region of convargence, (a) Time shifting (Section 9,52)

(b) Shifting in the j-domain (Section 9.5,3)
(c) Time scaling (Section 9.5.4)

(d) Convolution property (Section 9.5.6)

9*53,

As presented in Section 9.5. 10, the initial value theorem states that, for a signal x{f)
< with Laplace transform X{s) and for which x{t) = for r 0, the initial value of
xif) {i.e., t(0+)J can be obtained from X{s) through the relation

j(O-K) = lim^X(j).

jcq. (9.110)]

.

736

The Laplace Transform

Chap. 9

^ < Rrst, we note that, since^ xO)

forr 0, xO) = x{i)uirX Next, cTcpanding xij)

an a Taylor series at i = 0H-, v^e obtain

= Jf(f)

w(0n!

(P9.53-l>

whtre ^'^^O+J denotes the nth derivadve of x(t) evaluated all = 0+.
(a) Detennme the Laplace transForm af an arbitrary term ;t^'^V0+)(r'7fi!)w(f> on the right-hand side of eq, (P9.53-l>. [You may find it helpful to review Example
9,14.)
(b) From your result in part (a) and the expansion in eq, (P9.53-1), show that K(s}
can be expressed as

XM^Ý.^"\0+^}J,l+l
£=
(c> Demot^strate thai eq. (91 10) f&llows from the resuli of part <b)
(d) By first decermining x(t)^ verify the initial -value theorem for each of the fol-
lowing examples^

(e) Amore general fonn of the initiai-valuetheorcm states that if jr*"'(0-H) = y for
< = n N, then j:^^*(0+) !irti,^o..T^^'X(j>, Demorjstrate that this more general
statement also follows from che result in part (b).
9.54. Consider a real-valued signaJ x{t] with Laplace transform A'(j),
(a) fiy applying complex conjugation to both sides of eq. (9.56)t show that X{s\ -
(b) From your result in (a), show that if X(t) has a pole (zero) at j ^ Ji], it most
also have a pole {zero) ats = sj; i.e., for x(t) real£ the poles and zeros of X<j) that are not on the r*al axis must occur in connplex conjugate pairs.
9,55* In Section 9,6, Table 9.2, we listed a number of Laplate transfoim paii^, and we indicated specifically how transfonn pairs 1 through 9 follow from Examples 9.1
and 9. 1 4, together with various properties from Table 9, L
By exploiting properties from Table 9. 1, show how transform pairs ID through
16 follow from transfoiTn pairs 1 through 9 in Table 9.2.
9,56. The Laplace transform is said to exist for a speciftc complex s if the magnitude of
-- < the transform is finite that is, if \X(s)\ *.
m Show that a sufficient condiLion for the existence of the tiansform X(s) s =
^0 ^ cTo + Jtwo is that
:^(r)^"^"V; <^.
1

Cnap. 9

Problems

737

In other words, show that x(t) exponent! ally weighted by e~""' is <ibsoliite]y integrablc. You will need to use the result that, for acompIeK function f(t),

h
fU)dt ^ { \f{t)\dt.
I

(P9.56-1)

Without rigOTOusly proving ei^. (E^,56- 1). argue its plausibility,
9.57* The Laplace transfoim X(j) of a signal .xit) has four poles and an unknown number
of zeros. The signal xiO is known to have an impulse at / = 0. Determine what
information, if any, this provides about the number of zeros and Uicir locatiorts,

95S£ Let h(t) be the Impulse response of a L-ausal and stable LTl system with rational
systetn function His). Show that g{!) = CR^{/)(0} is also the impulse response of a.
(;ausal and stable system.

9*59. If SC(.f) denotes the unilaLeral Laplace transform of Jf(/), determine, in terms of 9Cu),

the unilateral LapUce tran^fomn oL

(a) x(i- 1) (c) i\x(r)dT

^ Cb) x(t+ \)
(d)

EXTENSION PROBLEMS
9,60* In long-distance telephone communication, an echo is sometimes encountered due
to the transmitted signal being reflected at the receiver, sent back down the line> reflected ag^in at the transmitter, and returned to the receiver The impulse response for a system that models this effect is shown in Figure P9.60, where we have assumed that only one echo i.s received The parameter T corresponds to the one-^way travel time along the communication channel, and the parameter a represents the
attenuation in amplitude between transmitter and receiver

,3

J

i

3T

t Figure P9,60

(a) DeLermirie the system function H(x} and associated region of convergence foi the system.
(b) From your result in part <a>, you should observe that H{s) does, not consist of a
ratio of polynomials. Nevertheless^ it is useful to represent it in terms of poles
= and Tieros, whcre^ a?j usual, the zeros arc the values of j for which //(j)

)

73 S

Ths Laplace TransfDiTT)

Chap 9

and ihc poles are the values of .v for which i/H{:^) = 0. For the syijtem function
found in part (a), determine the zeros and demonstrate Kha.1 there are nu poles.
(c) From your resulL in part (b), sketch the pole-zero plot for ffU) (d) By tionsidering th¨ appropriate vectors in the A-plane, sketch the magnttade of
the Irequency rewponse of the iiyNtem.
9£6i. The autocorrelation functicm of a i^ignal x(f) is defined as

(a) Determine, in terms <si Mt\ the impulse response h{i) of an LTl system for

which, when ihe input in xi!\ the output is (f?^M) [Figure P9.fil(a)]. (b> From your answer in pan (a)^ deierniine* ^ ^ (s), the Laplace transform of 4^ i , (t)
in terms of X{s}. Alf>(>, express ^^.(j-u), the Fourier transform oditTxij), iti

terms of X{ju)).

ROC (c) If x(i) has the pole- zero patt&m and

shown in Figure P9.61{b), sketch the

ROC pole-zero pattern and indicate the

for 0,,(t).

xftj

htt;.

*- ^..0)

Stt*
I I I I I
a -2 -i

<5i-e

(a)

(b)

Figure F9.61

m 9,61 In a number of apphcationi signal design and analysis, the class of signals

<^.e(0 = e-"-L,,{t)u{tl

= II

0, I, 2

(P9.62-U

where

d" ^"^^>-::7 7.7<^"^"^)-

(P9.62-2>

is encountered-
(a) The functifms ^.,,(0 are referred lu a.s l^^uerrt polynomials. To verify that they in fact have the ftirm of polynomials, determine U0), L\{t\, and È.T(/)expIicirly-
(b) Using the properties of the Laplace transform in Table 9-J and Laplace tr^sform pairs Jn Table 9.2, detemnine the Laplace Ixansform *n(y) of 0;j(f
{c> The set of signals *^,,{t\ can be generated by exciting a network of the furm in Figure P9.62 with an impul&e From your result in part (b), determine /J^J) and H2{s) s^) that the impulse responses along the cascade chain are the signals
4>riU) as indicated.

Chap 9

Problems

ft{t)

Hi(s)

Hjtst

Hf(3)

739

H^(s|

'

^(t)

^2(n Figure P9.62

<^i t)

9.63- In filcer desLgr, it is often po^^iible and convenient to transform a lowpass filler to a highpass filter and vice versa. With His) denoting the transfet ftinction of the
original filter and G{s) that of the transformed filter, one such commonJy used transformatioTi consisLs of replacing shy 1/j; that is,

(a) For//(j) = l/(j + 1/2), sketch \H(Jti>)\ and G(£|.
{b} Determine the linear constant-coefficient differential equation associated with H{s\ and with G{s).
(c) Now consider a more general case in which Hi^s) is the transfer function asso-
ciated with the linear constant-ct>efficicnt differentiaJ equation in the general
forra

iP9.6y^l}

Without any loss of generality, we have assumed that the number of derivatives
^ is the same on both sides of the equation^ although in an) particular case,
some of the coefficients may be zero. Determine His) and Gis). (d) From your r&sult ir part (cX determine, in terms of the coefficients in
eq. [P9,63-l)j the linear coustant-coefficient differential equation associated
with G{i).

9£<rt, Consider the /fLC circuit shown irt Figure 9,27 v^ith input xit) and output y(t).
U C (a) Show that if /f. and arc all positive, then this LTI system is stable.
C (b) How RhouLd R, L, and be related to each other so that the system represents a
sccond-oider Butterworth filter?

RLC 9*65* (a) Determine the differential equation relating V((f) and vo(r> for the

cux:uit

of Figure P9.65.

=t=Vo(t)

Figure P9.65

;

740

The Laplace Tran sform

Chap .

9

(b) Suppose that M/) - e ^'u(t). Using (he unilateral Laplace transform, deter-
> mine vjj) for {

9,66,

Consider the RL circuit showrt in Figure P9h66. Assume that the current i<0 has TÈac:tie<l a steady state with the swiich at position A. At time r = 0, the switch is moved from [Xrsition A to position B.

'(t}

B

r

Figure P9.6S

> (a) Find the differential equation relating i(t) and V2 for f

0~ .

Specify

the

initiaJ

condition (i.e.^ the value of ((0~)) for this differetitiaJ equation in terms of V|.

(b) Using the properties of the onilatefal Laplace transform in Table 9.3 , detenninc

and plot the eument iii) for each of the fol lowing vaJues of Vi and v^
- (i) V, V, W2 - 2 V

= ^ (ii) V|

4 V, V2

V

(lii) v^ - 4 V,V2 = 2 V

Using your answers for (j), (ii), and (iii), argue that the cuiTent i<0 may be expressed as a sum of the circuit s zero-state Ttspoflse and zero-input response.

10
The z-transform

w ^^^^'
^^^^^g

n.

' >(! ^^d^H

10.0 INTRODUCTION
In Chapcer 9, we developed the Laplace transform as an extension of the continuous-time Fourier transform. This ejttension was motivated in part by the fact that ii can be applied to a broader class of signals than the Fourier transform can, since there are many sig-
nals for which the Fourier transform does not converge but the Laphice transform does.
The Laplace transform allowed us, for example, 'to perform transform analysis of un&table systems and to develop additional insights and tools for LTl system analysis.
In this chapter, we u$e the same approach for discrete time as we develop tiie ztransform. which is the discrete-time counterpart of the Laplace transform. As we will
see, the motivationsi for and propeitLes of the ^-transform closely parallel those of the Laplace transform. Just a* with the relationship between continuous-time and discrete-
time Fourier transfontiA, however, we will encounter some important distinctions between
the s-u-ansform and the Laplace transform that arise froiti the fundamental differences between continuous-time and discrete-time signals and systems.
10,1 THE z-TRANSFORM
As we saw in Section 3,2, for a discrete- time linear time-invariant system with impulse
response h\n\, the response y[nl of the system to a complex eiponeittial input of the form
^ is
74T

742 where

The z-Transforrr

Ctiap. 10

= For z - e^*^ with w real (i.e., with \z[

I )> the sumtnatioa in eq. (ItJ 2^ conresponds to

th& discrete-time Fourier transform of h[/i\. More generally, when \z\ is not restricted tc

unity, the stiTtimatit>n is referred to as the z-transform of fi[i].

The z-traiisfomi of a general discrete-time signal tfi] is defined ai'

^ Xix) =A

x[n]z-\

:io.3)

where ; is a camplex' variai>k. For coctvemence, the ^-trimiform of x[n] wiU scmetirVfc^ be denoted as Z{j[;[nl} and the relationship between x[n] and its z-trajisform indicated as

jfrtj J-^ Xiz).

(10.4)

In Chapter 9, we considered a number of imponant relationships between the
Laplace transform amd the Fourier transfoitn for continuoiLs-time signals. In a similar, but not identitaU way, there are a number of imponant relationships between the z-transiform
and the discrete-time Fourier transforni. To explore these relationships, we express the
complex variable z in polar form as

- z

ri'J'^,

{10.5)

with r as the magnitude of È andi> as the angle of;. In terms of r and ¨*, eq, (10,3) heconnes

or equivalently,

+*
Xire^"^) = ^{x[n]r~''}e^^'^''.

(10,6)

From eq. (10.6), we see that Xire^"^) is the Fourier transform of the sequence x[n\
multiplied by a real exponential r~"\ thai is,

Xire^'^) = J{x[nlr-"l

(10.7)

The exponenfial weighting r~" may be decaying or growing with increasing /i, depending

We on whether r ii greater than or less than unity.

= note in particular that* for r

1, or

' The ^-IransfOTTn Jciined in eq. (10 ?> is often r^feffrd to as the bilateral i-transfnnn, to dis^LingLJish

it fnin the unilateral z-iraii'ilfoTwi, ^'tikh *c develop in Section 10.9. The Wlattral E-tratisfomi mvoWcP a

suDimation from -=^ eo +£, while ihe oiulateral Eransfomi has a forrc ^iiniUrto eq. U')'3)tbijt wiih summation

we limits frnm itj +==, since wc are diufitly cuncemcd with the bilateral s-transfomi.

wci] reJer to X{z) ai

defined ineq. (I0.3J >iLm[]Ly as ihe s-traasform,-eKcepl]n Seutir^n 10.9> in which we uic the wordi "ynilaterat"

aCHJ ''b^latcol'' to avoid an^biguiCy.

Sec. 10.1

The z-Traisform

743

equjviilemly. |:| = L eq. (J 03) reduces to the Fourier transfoim; that is,

X{z)

= Jt(^^-) = JM¨1K

;=f J"

(10.8)

The relationship between the ^-transfHrm and Fijurier transform for discrete-time
signal.'i parallels clojiely the concspoirding discussion in Section 9.1 fort;ontinut>us-time signals, but with sorrte important differences. In the continuous-time case, the Laplace
tranyftwTii reduces to the Fourier tranisform when the real pan uf the transform variable is zertj. Interpreted in terras of the j-plane, this means that the Laplace transform reduces to the Fourier transform on the innaginary axis (i.e., for s = juty In contrast, the z-transform redutes to the Fourier transfonn when the magnitude of the uansfonn variable z is urtiry (i.e^ for ^ = e^"^). Thus^ the :^-'lTansfonTi reduces to the Fourier transform on the contour
in the complej( ^-plane corres pending to a. circle with a radius of unityn as indicated in Figure 10.1. This circle in the z-pJane is refctxed to as the unit circle and plays a role in the discussion of the ^-transform simile to the role of the imaginary axis in the s plane for the Laplace transfomn.

Unit circle

z-plane

Figure lO. i Complex z-plane The
z-lranstorm reduces to the Fourief Iranstorm ior values of z or the unit
Circle.

From eq. (10.7), we see that, for convergence of the ^-transform, we require that the

Fourier transfoim i>f x[n]r~" converge. For any specific sequt^nce x[Fi], we would expect

this (convergence for some values of rand not for others. In general, the z-tran sform of a

sequence has associated with it a range of values of z for which XU) converges. As with

the Laplace transfymi, this range of values is referred to as the region of convergence

ROC (KOC). \i the

includes the unit circle, then the Fourier transform also converges. To

illustrate ihe ^-transform and the associated region of convergence, let us; consider several

examples.

Example 10.1
Consider the signal ;vl/il = a"Hrnl. Tten, frcmeq.{10.3},

n- '

n=n

For convergence of X(z\ we require (hat Z^-i b^"^ I" < ¨. Conset^uently, the region

f)fc¨nv<rgenceistherangeofvaIuesof^forwhich |a^" < 'I

Lojequivalentl>,

::|

>

\a\.

744

The z-Transfonn

Chap. 1

Then

m^9)
1=
ROC Thus^ the z-transfoimi for this signal is weil^Jefined foi any value cf a, with ao determined by the ma^tude of a according to ¨q. ( 1 0k9). For eian^e , for a - I , x[n]
is the unit step sequence with ^'ttajis^form

Xiz) =

\

\-Z-'

> \z\

1.

We $ee that t}>e ^-uransform in eq. (10-9) is a rational function. Consequently, just
as with rationa] Laplace cransforms. the s-transform can be characterized by its zeres (the

roots of the numerator polynomial) and its poles (the roots of ti>e denominator polyno-
mial]. For this example^ there is one zem^ at ^ = 0, aod one polCn at ^ = a. The pole-icro

plot and the legion of coavcrgcncc for Example 10,1 arc ^howa in Figure 10-2 for a value

ROC of d between > and 1. For \a\ 1, the

does not include the unit cLttrLe. consilient

with the fad that, for these values of fj; the Fourier transfbnn of a'^uLjiJ does rnt converge.

Figure tO.2 PG^-zero plot and region of convargent^e for Example 101 for
< a< 1,

Example 1 0.2

Nowlet j:[n] = -a^n[-n - l].Then

A--^

-]

(10.10)

n= I

n=il

< U < Ifjfl ^z\

or equivalently, |;| ]d|^ tht sum in eq. (It}-10) converges and

X{z) = i - I - a '^

\ -- an.zT-1

z- a:. k!<M.

<io.in

The poLe-zero plot aikd region of convergence fox this e:taiiipk are shown in Figure 103 for a value of d between D and 1.

Sec 10.1

The z-Transform

J nit Circle z-plane

7+5

Fjgure 1 0-3
0< j< 1.

Pole-zero plot and region of convergence tof Example 1(1.2 lor

Comparing eqs. (109) and ( 10.11), and Figures 10.2 and 10.3, we see that the al-
gebraic expression for X(z) and die c^jiresponding pole-zero plot are identical in Ejtanfiplcs 10. 1 and 10.2, au<i die ^-transforms differ only in their regions of convergence. ThuSt as with the Laplace transform, specification of the E-cransform requires both the algebraic oppression and the region of convergence. Also> in both examples, the sequences were exponentials and the resulting j-transfoims were rational. In fact, se further suggested by the following examples, X[z) will be rational whenever jc[rt] is a linear combination of real or complex exponentials:
Example 10.3
Let us -coni^ider a iiignal that is the sum of t\vo real expooentiaU:

The ;;-traii3form js then

(10,12)

-'z(5)-i*-- ¨ñ .5.6,1

(10.13)

(1U.14)

z{z- ')
(: -\U-\)

(1DJ5>

ForctJiivergence of X(;), both sums in eq. (10.13) must converge, which reijuires

< > < thatbi>lh|{].'3)5"^| J and|(l/2)^-il

l,oreqiiiva]ently, ]c|

1/3 and |^? > 1/2. Thu^,

> the rej^ion of convergence i^ \A 1/2.

746

The z-Transfornn

Chip. 10

The ."'traiLsfnmi for this enamplc can alyj be obtained using the resuhs of Example 10 1. .Specifically^ from ihedcfiniiion of the ^-transform in eq, {10.3), we see that the ^-tTiiiisform is linear; that is, if jffir] is the sum of two terms, then X{z} will be the sum of ihe ;-transfortns of the individual terms and will converge when both ^-transforms converge. From EAunnpic 10,1,

^l£w^^

1

i-\z --\

l^>T

(10.16)

and

and consequently.

^ ] u[nl

^-{^

k > 2^

(10.17)

'5 ¨lnl-flU ¨lnl

-k-'

>i.
14
-h-'

(10.18)

ROC as we determirted before. The pole-zero plot and

for the ^-transform of each of the

individual terms smd for the combined sij;nal are shown in Figjie 10.4.

3nt

/d

z-plar^

\

'yi

S\È

vi )

(a)

#>)

Z'plarie

(c)
Figure 1 0.4 Pole-zero plot ar-d region of convergence for the individual terms
andthfiSLjrTiinE>Èampleia3;(a)V(1 - \2-^l\i\> ^ [bjl/0 - lz-*),jz!> l; (C)7/(1 - T^Z:r-1 )-6/{^-U-'),\z}>\.

h

Sec. 10.1

The z-Transform

Example T0.4
Let UN consider the signal

747

The s-tranrironn of this signal is

or equival-ently.

,jifyA

I /I

--. wjn]

-f "'''''

1JV3

'fFn]

)- J,y .jfl^J^ J

V-'^^^-

fl-O

t

1

2j 1-^ Ifj^^+r^

I

1

2j) ^\^ j^-^z ''

(iai9)

Xiz) =

TT^"-

U- {e'^^^Mi- {e '^^*)

(10.20)

For convergence of X(^)t both surqs Lncq. (10.19) must ci^o verge, which rcquiJti

< md w that 1(1/3 V'^i'^l \

^ > 10/^)^ ^*^*E ' '^

eqmvalently, [j^ L/3. The pole-

I

ROC zero plot add

for this cxampJe are shown in Figure 10.5.

^m

_^

Z^-- X ^

?-p

^ -^ :'

+{ "*

~^^

'

\

1
i

'

\

'4 /'

> >r

*i*

frgufe 10. s Pole-zeno plot and ROC Tor the /-transform in E^nnple 10.4.
In each of the preceding four examples, we expressed the s-traii,'iForm both as a ratio of polynomials in z and as a ratio of polynomials in ^"^ From the definition of the ^-transform as given in eq. (I0.3)i we see that^ for sequences which are zero for n <0, X(z) involves only negative powers of ^. Thus, for this class of signals, it is partic-
"
jlarly convenient for Xiz) to be expressed in terms of polynomials in ; ' raLher than z, and

74*

The 7-Transform

Chap. 10

when appropriate, we wili use that form in our discussion. However, nefereace to the poies
and zeros is always in terms of ihe roots of the numerator and denominator expressed as poJyntiniials in Zr Aiso, it is sametimes convenient to refer to Xiz), written a^ a ratio of polynomials in ;, as havitig poles at infinity if the degree of the numerator exceeds the degree of the denontinator or zeros at infinity if the nuQieratf>r is of smallei degree than the denominator

1 0,2 THE REGION OF CONVERGENCE FOR THE z-TRANSFORM
Jn Chapter 9, we saw thai there were specific properties of the region of convergence of the L^lace tranafortn fbr different classes of signals and that understanding the^e properties led to further insists about Che transFomi. In a similar manner, we explore a number of properties of the region of convergence for the s-transfomi. Each of the
following properties and it$ justificaiion closely parallel the corresponding property in
Section 9.2.

ROC Pr<^?erty Ij The

of X[s> consists of a ring iti the t-plane centered about the

origin.

ROC This property is illustrated in Rgure 10.6 and follows from the fact that the

consists of those values of ^ = r^J" for which x[n\r~" has a Founer transform that con-

ROC verges. That is, the

of the ^-transform of x[n] consists of the values of ; for which

x{n\r~'^ is absolutely summabler^

2 k¨]|i

(10,21)

z -plane
Figure 1 0.6 ROO as a ling \r\ the
z^TK. \n souia cases, the met
boundary can extend inward to tha oci-
gin, in which case the ROC becomes a disc. In othm cases, the outer bcund-
ary can extend outv^ard to infmity.
^For a thttmigfi tzEatittfint of tbe ijiAtheitiatica] prDperties of z-aaasionas, see R.V Chuncjiill arid J.W. Bl*wn. Complex ^riabSgs tPtdAppHcations (Sthtsd.) (New York: McGraw-MitU 1^90), and E. [. Joryn ThÈ<>iy anJ Application of the ;- Jrora^rm AferfioJ CMalaljar, FL; R. E. KfiegcrRjb. Co.. 1982^

5

Sec. 1 0.2

The Region of Convergence for the ^-Transform

749

ThuSf convergence is dependent only on r = |^| and not on w. Consequently^ if a

specific value of z is in the ROC^ then all values of ^ on tie same circle (i.e., with the

ROC same magnitude) will be in the ROC. This by itself guarantees that the

will con-

ROC sist of concentric rings. As we will see when we discuss Property 6, the

must it^

fatt consist of only a single ring. In some cases the inner boundary of the RtX^ may ex-

tend inward to the origin, And in some cases the outer boundary may extend ouxward t(j

infinity.

ROC Property 2: The

does not contain any poles.

As with the Laplace transform, tKis property is simply a consequence of the fact that
at a pole X(^z} is infinite and therefore, by definition, does not converge.

ROC Property 3: If x[n] is of finite duration, then the

is ihe entire :- plane, except

= - possibly z. and/or z ^.

A finite -duration sequence has only a finite numher of nonzero values, extending,

= = say, fi^jm ti

A^i to n

jV^. where N] and N2 are finite. Thus, the ^-transform is the sum

of a finite number of terms; that is.

For z not cquat to zero or infinity, each term in the sum will be finite, and conse-

quently, Xiz) will converge. If jV] is negative and JVj positive, so that x\n] has nonzero
> values both for ¨ < and rt 0, then the summation includes tenns with both positive

powers of z and negative powers of Zr As \z\ -^ 0, terms involving negative powers of
-- z become unbounded, and as \z\ * k^, terms involving positive powers of z become un-

bounded. Consequently, for Vi negative and W^ pesitive, the R.OC does not include z --

or ; ^ =t. If A^i is zero or positive, there are only negative powers of z in eq. { 10.22), and

ROC consequently, the

includes ^ = £. If ^2 i^ lero or negative, there are only positive

ROC powers of z in cq. (10.22), and consequently, the

includes z = 0.

Exampre TO,

Consider tbt unit impulse signal S [/jj. Its s-traasform is given by

^1- --

ROC \vith an

consisting of the entire ; planCn including ^ =

h^nd, consider the delayed unit impulse S[n-- I], for wbch

Eind e = ¨, On the other

^ ^ Sf;i - 1]

S[n - 11;-" = z~^

(111.24)

7sa

Ttie Mranstorm

Chap. 1

ROC Thi'; ^-transform is well defined except at j = 0, where there is a pole. Thus, the TM consvisti; of the entire ^-plane, including z = but excluding ^ = 0. Similaily, consider
an impulse advanced in time^ namely, S\n + 1]. In this case£

^ È[n + l]

S^t"^ll^" =

(10,25)

ROC whjch is weLL dehned for all hnite values of :. Thus^ the

consisis of the entire tlnite

^-plaae (mctuding z = 0)> but there is a pole at inrinity.

Property 4; If j:[mj is a right-sided ^equence^ and if the circle |;| = ro i.s in the ROC. > then all fitiite values of ^ for which \z\ r^ will also be iti the ROC.

The justification for this pioperty follows in a manner identical to that of Property 4

A in Section 9.2. right-sided sequence is zero prior to some value of n, say, A^i. If the

Now = circle s| - ro is in the ROC, then x[n]r^" is absolutely summable.

consider |^|

r]

I

> with r\

r(h so that r^ " decay.^ iriore quickly than rf^" for increasing n. As illustrated

iti figure 10.7, this more lapid cxpotwntial decay will further attenuate sequence value.s

¨

xhl

Ui
Ni

rfl
mt lIllllliniiniTtiiT

M ^1

Tt^Tr
.

TTTTTTTTHfff^^***t

> Figure 1 0,7 Witii r, /a, xifllrf"

Decays faster with increasing n than

^ <>OTS xCJ'o '' Since *[/?]

O.n < /i^.

this implies that if x|n]r: " is abso-

lutely sumrnable. then xi/jj/^f" wil be
also.

.

Sec. 10.2

The Region of Convergence for the z-Transform

751

for positive valvie-i of n and caniiot cause sequence values for negative values of m to be-
< come unbounded, since x{n] i& right sided and, in particular, x{nlz~" = for rt I\'i
Consequently* x{n]r{" is absolutely summable.
For right-sided sequences in general, eq. (103) takes the fomi

X nt) -

^Wz~",

(10.26)

where A^i is finite and may be positive or negative. If N^ is negative, then the summation

in eq. (10.26) includes terras with positive poivers of;, which become unbounded as f^] -*

ROC =c. Consequently, for right-sided sequences in general, the

will not include infinity.

However, for the particular class of causal sequences, i.e,. sequences thai arc zero fur

ROC < K 0, A^i will be nonnegative, and consequently, the

will include z - ^

Property 5: ifjc[n] k a left-sided sequence, and if the circle |;| = r^ is in the ROC,
< then all values of z for which <\z\ ro will also be in the ROC.

Again, thisi property closely parallels the corresponding property for Laplace transformSj and the proof of it ar*d its basis in intuition are simiLar to the proof and intuition for Property 4. In general, for left-sided sequences, from eq. (10.3), the surtimation for the S'ttansform \ii\\\ be of the form

^/f^

X{z) -

xin]z\

(10.27)

where TVi may be positive or negative. If A'^ is positive, then eq. < iO.27) includes negative

-- powers of z, which become unbounded as |;| ^ [>. Cottsequently, ftir lef^-sided sequences,

ROC = the

will not in general include ^ 0. However, if A^^ :^ (so that xln] = for all

ROC > n 0), the

^ will include z 0.

= IVoperty 6: Jf x[n] is two sided, and if the circle |::|

ro is in the ROC. theri the

ROC - will consist (jf a ring in the ^-plane that includes the circle \z.\

rn.

ROC As with Property 6in Section 9,2, the

for a two-sided signal can be examined

ROC by expressing x[n] as the surrj of a right-sided and a left-sided signal. The

for the

righi-siiled component is aregioii boiiruJed on the inside by a circle and extending outward

ROC to (and possibly including) inftnily. The

for the left- sided component is a region

bounded on the out^iide by a circle and ejtlending inward to, and possibly including, the

ROC ori^m. The

for the composite signal includes the intersection of the ROCs of the

components. As illusirated in Figure 10.8, the overlap (assuming that there is one) is a
m rmg the s-plane.

We illustrate the fc^egoing properties with examples that closely parallel Exam-

ple^P 9.6 and 9.7.

752

^
f
J
\
\
N

x
\
1
\
/
y

z-pla
^^

(a)

The z-Translorm

Chap 10

^tt%

jf
/'
f
I
s
1
r
1
s
\ N
^

^ V
\ \
1
1
; r
/
jf if

z-plane <R*

{b)

t-plane

Figure 1 0,8 (a) ROC far right-sided sequence; (b) ROC for left-sided sequence; (c) intersection of thi ROCs ifi (a) and (b)£ reprBsentiF^Q the nOC for a two-^tded sequence that is the sum oT the right^ided and ttie left-$ided sequeopg.
Example 10.6
Consider the signal

Then

0, otherwise
I

^-1
Xix) ^^a'^z
N I
- Z(--'/
n-fi
1 -a^-i

z^'-a''
7fi-\ zT-- a

{10.2&)

Sec. 1 0.2

Tlie Region of Coovergeice forthe z-Transform

753

ROC Since Kin] is of fl niw Length, it fo IJows ftom Property 3 thai the

i ndude^ ihc entire z-

plane e^^cept pc>ssibl>' the DTigjn and/or inanity. In fact, from our discussion of Propeity 3>

ROC since K[n] is zero for n < 0. the

will extend to infinity. However, since x[n] is

ROC norizero for !£me posibve values of n^ the

will not include the origin. This is evident

^ N ftont eq. C10.2SJ, front which we see that there is a pole of order -- 1 at ^ = 0. The

roots of the numerator polynomial are at

= = a ^, af^'^'^'^l i

1

N - 1.

(10.29)

= = The root for ft

caiKcls the pole atz a. Consequently, there are no poles other than

at the origin, l^ke remaining £to& areat

(10,30}

The ])ole-zero pattern is shown in Figure 10.^.

(N-lJst order pote

z-^ane
Unit circle

Figure 10,9 Pole-zero pattern for Exampte 10.6 with yv = 16 and

< < ^

1 17w region of convergence for this example consists of aJI

= values of ^ except z i\.

Example f 0.7

Let

x[n] ^ t^"^. b>0.

(10.31)

< > This two-sfded sequence \s JUusCrated in Figure lO.lO, for both b 1 and i? 1. The

z-transfomi for the sequence can be obtained by expressing it as the sum of a right-sided

We and a left-sided sequence.

have

= + jeffl]

i/'ttln] h~"u[-n - 1].

(10.32)

From Example 10.1,

b^uln]
aifcd from Example 10,2,
b "ul-n- 1]

> \z\ b.
1 -bz-^'

-\ 1 -&-"r''

< 1.1

-,-

(10.33) (10.34^

754

TTie r-Transtofm

Chap. lfl

1
o<b<i

fa)

x[r.j == ^\^\

1

1

A

ñ

ñ

ñ_ñA

¨ 1

1

1

b^ 1

lllliw
IlTTffiiW. ^ttttnUtll

*
^
1
1 1
#
ñ
*
£
1
>

(b)

Fpgure lO.iO

= < Sequence Jf[nl

Èil''iforO & < 1 andtori&> l:{a) b =

0,95; (b)b= 1.05.

ROC In Figure,:; 1 0. 1 1 (aMi) ^f^ show the pole-zero patttm and

for eqs. [10,33)

< b> > < and ( 1 0.34J, fur values of ^ J and

i*

I . For

\. there is no common ROC,

aruithus the seqience in eq. (10,31) wiU not tave a :-tiaiisfonn£ even though (Ik right-

< sided and Icft-sidcd compooetit^ do individuaH^^. For fr I, the ROCs in eqs. (10.33)

and (10.34) overlap, and thuj the Z'transfonn for the composite sequence is

y(z) =

I

i-fcr

or equivaiently^

1

L

1

1

1

(10.35)

(10.36)
Thecomespondingpol-e-zeropattEmandROC are shown in Figune 10.11(e).

Sec 10.2

The Region of Convergence fof the z-Transform

Unit circle z-p4an6

t>' fl.

755
dn4 Unit Circle z-pl$ne
(R,

(a)
Unit dtrcle z-plana
(8¨

i^)

^iv*

Unit cincle

\ z-ptane

Cc)

te)

Figure 10,11 Pole-zero plots and ROCs for E^mpie 10J: (a) eq (1033) far

*< 6^1;{b)eq > (10,34) for if 1, (c)eq. (10,33) for <

1;(d)eq (10.34) for

< iK < < 1; (e) pole-zero plotand ROC for aq (10.36) nvftliCl ft 1.For&> 1,

the /-transfofm of x|/j] in eq, (10.31 ) do¨s aot ^nverge for any value of z.

7 Sh

The /-Transfo rm

C hap. 1

In discussing the L^lace transform in Chapter 9, we remarked that for a rational

ROC Laplace transform, the

is always bounded by poles or infinity. We observe that in

the foregoing examples a similar statement applies to the ^-transform, and in fact, this is

al^ay^ true:

ROC Property 7: Tf the ^-transform Xiz) of x[n] is rational, then its

is bounded by

poles or extends to infinity.

Combining Property 7 with Properties 4 and 5, we have

ROC -- Property 8r If the r'transfomi Xi^) of x[n] is raticmaL and if x[n] is right sided, then

the

is the region in the ^-plane outside the ciutermosi pole i.e., oiiLside the circle

of radius equal to the largest magnitude of the poles of X(z). Furthermore, if x[n] is

< ROC causal (i.e., if it is right sided and equal to for n 0), then the

also includes

Thus, for right-sided sequences with rational transfomrs, the poles are all closer to
the origin than is any point in the ROC.

Property 9: if the z-transform X{z) of x[n] is rational, and if x{n] is left sided, then

ROC -- the

is the region in the j-plane inside the innermost nonzero pole i.e., inside the

circle of radius equal to the smallest magnitude of the poles of X(z) other than any at

= ^ - and extending inward to and possibly itiduding e 0. In particular, if x[n] is

> ROC antic ausal (i.e.^ if it is left sided and M^ual to for n
I

0), then the

also includes

z = 0.

TTius, for left-sided sequences, the poles of X(z} other than any at ; = are farther ftom the origin than.U any point in the ROC.
For a given pole-zero pattern, or equivalendy, a given rational algebraic expression
X{z)^ diere are a limited numbcF of different ROCs that are consistent with the preceding properties. To illustrate how different ROCs can be associated with the same pole-zero
pattern, we present the following example, which closely parallels Exarnple 9.B.

Exampfe fO.8
Let us consider all of the passible ROCs that can he consected with the function

The associated pole-zero pattern is shown in Figure 10.12(a). Based on our discussion

LD this section, there are three possible ROCs that can be associated with tMs algebraic

ROC expttssion for the ^-transform. These

s arc indicated in Figure 10.l2(b)-(d).Each

coiresponds to a different sequence. Figure 10*12(b> is associated with a right-sided

sequence. Figure 10.12(c) with a left-sided sequence, and Figure 10.12(d) with atwo-

H ROC È]ded ^a^quc^lce. Since Figure 10.12(d) the only one for which the

includes the

ROC unit circle, the sequence corresponditig to this* choice of

is the only one of the three

for wliich the Founer transform converges.

Sec. 10-3

The Inverse z Transform

Hth
Unit circle
/ / z-ptane

(a)

757
w^,Unrt circle

Figure 1 0.12 The three possible ROCs that can t>e connected wrth th¨

eKpKSSion for the z-transforn^ in Example 10.S: (a) pole-zem pattam for X{^)'y

RX {k) pole-zerc pattern and

if x{n] te right sided; (c) pole-zero pattern and

ROC if x[ti] is left sjdad; (d) pois-zsro pattum and ROC if x[n] Is two sided. In eac^ case, ^s zero at the origin is a second-order zero.

103 THE INVERSE Z-^TRANSFORM

In this section, we consider several procedures for determioing a sequence when its z-
transfortn is known. To begiti> let us consider the formal relation expressing a sequence in leims of its ^-transform. This expression can be obtained on the basis of the interpretation, developed in Section 10. 1> of the z-transform as the Fourier transform of an exponentially weighted sequence. Specifically, as expressed in eq. (10.7),

Xire^'") - ^{x[nVl

(10.38)

for any value of r so \hM z - re"^ is inside the ROC. Applying the inverse Fourier trans-
form to IxJth sides of eq. (10,38) yields
x[n]r-" = ^-'{Xire'^'jl

758

The z-Transform

Chap. 10

or
x[n] = r^?-*\Xireni Using the inverse Fourier transform expression in eq, (5.8), we have

(10.39)

or, moving the ejtponential factor r" inside the integral and combining it with the term

^W ^ -

[ X{re^*'){re^rd<^.

(10.40)

That i&t we can recover x\rj] from its z-transform evaluated along a contour z = re^'^ in
w the ROC, with r fixed and varying over a Itt interval. Let us now change the vanable
-- of mtegraiion from ti to s. With z re^*^ and r fixed, dz = jre^'^dio = Jzdo^. or Joj =
(\/j}z^^dz. The inttgmtion in eq, (10.40) is over a Iv interval in cu, which, in terms of Zt ctMTCSponds to one traversal around the circle \z\ TM r. Consequently, in terms of an
integration in the z-plane, eq. (10,40) can be rewritten as

2^^ ^"t"1]

==

-1
:r-^'q>X{z)z"-'dz,

(10.41)

O where the symbol denotes integration around acounterclockwise closed circular contour
-- centered at the origin and with radium r. The value of r can be chosen as any value for
which Xu) converges i.e.,an> value such that the circular contour of integrarion jj| ^ r is in the ROC. Equation (10.41) is the formal expression for the inverse ::-transfomi and IS the discrete-time counierpafl of eq. (9.56) for the inverse Laplace transform. As with
eq. C9h56), fonnal evaluation of the inverse transform equation (10,41) requires the use
of contour integration in the complex plane. There are, however," a number of alternative procedures for obtaining a sequence from its ^-transform. As with Laplace transforms, one particularly useful procedure for rational j;-iransfcrms consists of expanding the algebraic expression into a paitial-fi^tion expansion and recognizing the sequences a*^sociated with the individual lerms. In the following examples, we illustrate the procedure.

Example T0.9
Consider the z-transform

- = X{z-} --f-

-^-^
-i

> , kl

\.

00^2)

ROC There are two poles, one at ^ ^ 1/3 and one at r = 1/4, and the

lies atitsioe the

ROC outermost pole. Thai is, (he

consults of all points with magnitude greater than that

of the pole with the larger magnitude^ namely the pole at e = 1/3, From Prcpeitj 4 in

Section iO-2, we Chen know that the inverse tran'sforJin is a nght-?iided sequence. As

ditscnbed jr the appendix, X(z} can be expanded by the method of partial fractions. For

Sec. 10.3

The Inverse z-TransfOTTi

75^

thisexampLe, the pactia^fracd^rD e^pi^tsLOii, expressed: in polynomials in z ', is

md Thus, x[n] is the sum of two terms, one with z-transform l/[ 1 - ( I f4)z

'
]

the

-- other withs-transfcinn 2^1 (l/3)È"'l. In order to determine the inveriie^-trftnsform of

each of these indjvidu^j termSs we must specify the RlXT Absociated wit* each. Since

ROC ROC the

for Jf(7) is outside [he ouierrnost pole, the

for each icidividuaJ term iti

ROC eq. {'\0A3} must also be outside tht poie associated with thai term. That is, the

for each ttrni w>nsisVÈ of all points with rnagnit^ide greater than the magnitude of the

corresponding pole. Thus,

^(ni = ^ifnj + J^rnl.

(10.44)

where

1 ~ ^j~'
From Example WA, we can identify by in^'^pection that

^1

-ll J^irn]

"[nl

I

and

xAn] = 2|^1 ii{nl

U0.47)
{\D.m

and thus.

4^1 =

£[n] + l/ij ¨En].

(l)

{10.49)

Example tO.TO

^ No^^ Let us consider the same algebraic e^xprcjisiOEt for Xiz) in eq. (10,42), but with

ROC < < the

for X{z) as 1/4 |;| 1/3. EquaLon < 10.43) i^ still a valid paitial-fraction ex-

ROC pansion of the algebraic expr£5ion for Xiz), but the

associated with the individaal

ROC teitns will change. In particul^, since the

for X{z) is outside the pole at ; = 1/4,

ROC the

eorresponding to this term in eq. ( 1 0.43) is also outside the pole and consists of

all poims with magnitude greater than 1/4, as it did in the previous example. However,

ROC = Shince in this example the

for Xiz) is inside the pule at ^

\B, that is. since the

ROC ROC points in the

all have magnitude less than 1/3, the

corresponding to this term

must also lie inside this pole. Thus, the ^-transform paii& for die individud components

in eq. (10^44) are

^ j^iH

Trrr-zi- N > I

(10.50)

760

The z-Transform

Chap, 10

and

Z

X

,

,

t

The signal jci [n] remain!; as in eq. (10.47), while from Example 10.2, we can identify

il[i] = -^l^!)I .w,[--.rt-1L

(10 52)

so that

^M = A] w[nl - 2(^] u[-n - n

(10.53)

Example 1 0. 1 f

ROC < Finally, consider X{z) as in eq. [10.42), but now with the

\z\

1/4. In this case the

ROC ROC is mside both poles, i.e.^ the points in the

all have magmtude smaller than

ROC eithei of the poles at z = 1/3 or z = 1/4. Consequently the

for each tenD in the

partial-fraction expansion in eq. (1043) mu&t al^o lie inside the corre&pondiiig pole. As

a result^ the ^-transfoim pair for x\ [n] is given by

^ Jfi[fl]

_\_ _, ,

< \z\
\

(10.54)

while the È-b:ailsf6iin paiifoi X2ln] i& given by eq. (10.51). Applying the result of Ex.-
ample 10.2 to eq. (10.54), we find that

xdn}= -(^) u{-n-Xl

sothfit

-(ij-t-- "-<5)"

The foregoing e;camp)es iUustrate the basic piocedure af using pamai-fraction expansions to determine inverse ^-transforms. As with the corresponding method for the Laplace transform, the procedure relies on expressing the z-transform as a linear cotnbinaiion of simpler terms. The inverse transform of each term can th&n be obtained by
inspection. In particular, suppose that the pattial-firaction expansion of^^U) i5 of the form

so that the inverse transform of X(z) equals the sum of the inverse transforms o f the i ndi vid-

ROC ualtermsintheequation. If the

of A'(^)i$ outside the pole atz = dj, the inverse trans-

ROC form of the corresponding term in eq. (10.55) is X,fl^u[n]. On the other hand, if the

w- of Jl(^) isinsidft thepole af 2 = a,, the inverse transform of this lerm is -Ata"u[ --

1].

In general, the partial-fraction expansion of a rational transform may include terms in

Sfic "fO.S

The Inverse z'-Trartsform

761

m addition to the first-order [erms eq. (10.55). In Section 10.6, we h&t a number of other
^-transform p^im that can be used in conjunction with the E-transform properties to he developed in Section 10.5 to extend the inverse transform tncthod outlined in the preceding example to arbitrary rational ^- transforms.
Another very useful pr<icedure For deiertnining the inverse ^-transform relies on a poiver-series expansion of X{z) This procedure is motivated by the observation th^t the deJinition of the ^-transform gi\en in eq. (10-3) can be interpreted as a pt>wer series involving both positive and negative powers of ^, The coefficients in this power ^ries are,
in fact, the sequence values x\_n]. To illustrate how a power-series expansion can be used
to obtain the inverse s-transform, let us consider three examples.

Example 10.12

Consider the ^-transfonr.

< < + X^z) ^ 4f^ 2 -^ :^E n '.

\z,

^.

i 10.56^

From the pcwer-series definition of the ^-transform in eq, (10-3), we can deternune the
inverse transform of X(z} by im^pectigm

4,
rhl = . 2,

n = -2
n -0

0, otherwise

That is,

;^nl - 45[fl + 2] + 2B[n\ + 3&[rt - \\

{ 10.57>

Comparing eqs. ( 1 0.56) and ( 1 0,57 ), we see (hat different powen of z serve as placebolderi for sequence values at different points ia time, i.e.^ if we simply u.sc the transform
pair

-- ^y + Sin fluJ -^

*-

we can itnmediately pass from tq. (10.56) to ( 1 0k57> and vice versa,

Example TO, 13
Consider

1 -- az
Thi^ expression can be expanded in a power series by long division:
1 + ar ' + it^z~^ '+'
)l I-
T
az'
a?' ' -ah 1
-2

762

The z-Transtorm

Chap. 10

> < ThescritbexparisiDnofeq. (l0.58)coDveTgeSjsLiice |;| [fl|,flrequiviilcntly, |fl;"'| 1.

CompaiingdiiE^equaticn widi thed^limdonof the^-tratisforniinequatton(IOJ), we see,
< by marching terms in powers nf z, that x[n\ = 0, n ^ 0, jfOJ = ].x[\] = a; x\2\ a":
and in general, ^[1] = ^"u\r\], which i^ consistent wjUi Exampte lO.I.

ROC < > If, instead, the

of X{z) is specified as I^J

|fl| 01; equi vaJently, )o^ ']

J,

then the power-series expansion for 1/(1- az'^ ) in eq. ( I0.5SJ does not converge. How-

ever, we can obtain a convcr^^nt power series by long division a^ain:

-- a '^- aV-'"

+ 07 '

1)

i

-
1

a-'^

^-'z

or

I -rt^- I

-c.t-~I'z-ft -2^,,2' - ....

^ 4- = ^ -a ^ In this caiii, tht!n, x[fi\

0, n

0: and

1]

-a' ', Jf[-3]

-

= jc\n]

--(i"ul-n - I]. This is conriisti;nt with Example 1W.2.

aO.S9)
; that is,

Tbe power-series expansion method for ob:aJt)it:g the inven^e ^-transform is particii larl^ useful for nonrational ^-transforms, which we illustrate with the following example:

Example 10.14

CoTiiider the ^-transform

- y<E)

^az logd

>,

> \zl

\n\.

(10.60)

> < With 1^1

la), or, equivalently, |d^"' |

1, eq. (10.60J can be expanded in a powi^r series

usln^ the Taylor's ^erie^ expansion

\ ----- * i }i"^^i/*
logtl - v> ,

|l'|<J

{lO.&D

Applying this tueq. (1060), we have

(-ir^'fl-^- "

from which we can identify
^ ^E¨l = * '^""'tT' " -

an 61:

Sec. 1 QA

Gsometric Evaluation of the Fourier Transform from tfie Pole-Zaro P\o\

763

OT equivalcntly,
x[ft] = -^^^-i^n - I].
n
In Problem 10.63 we consider arelat^d example with region of convergence fzl < l^|.

10.4 GEOMETRIC EVALUATION OF THE FOURIER TIIANSFORM FROM THE POLE-ZERO PLOT

= In Section 10 1 we noted that the ^-transform reduces to the Fourier transform for |;|

1

(iÈ., for the contour in the z-plane corresponding to the unit circle), provided that the
ROC of the z-transform includes the unit circle, so that the Fourier transfonn converges
In a similar manner, we saw in Chafer 9 that, for cQntinuou&-time signals* the Laplace

transform reduces to the Fourier transfomi on the jcu-axis in the j-plane. In Section 9.4.

we also discussed the geometric evaluation of the continuous-tinie Fourier transform from

the pole-zero plot. In the discrete-time case, the Fourier transform can again be evaluated

geometrically by considering the pole aud zero vectors in the ;-plane. However, since in

= this case the rational function is to be evaluated on the contou]' |;|

1, we consider the

vectors ftomthe poles and zeros to the unit circle rather than to the imaginary axis. To

illustrate the procedure, let us consider first order and second-order systems, as discussed

in Section 6.6.

10.4,1 First-Order Systems

T}ie i mpul se respot^sc of a first-order causal discrete-time system is of the general form

h[n] = a^uln],

<i0.64:i

and from Exiunple 10,U its r-transform i.s

-^> ^^^> ^

'

-- = iI

\az

-1 \

z~ a

> i^l

I'^'l-

<10 "55)

ROC For |aj < 1, the

includes the unit circle, and consequently, the Fourier transform <ii

= h[n\ converges and is equal to H{z) for 7 e^*^. Thus, the frequency response for the

fiist-order systeni is

T^^. "(''"-> -

00.66)

Figure 10.13(a) depicts the pole-zero plot for H{z) in eq. (10.65), including the
= vectors from the pole (at z a) and zero (at z = 0) to the unit circle. With this pbt, the
geometric evaluation of H{z) can be carried out using the same procc4iife as described ir: Section 9.4. In particular, if we wish to evaluate the frequency response in eq. (10,65).
we perform ttie evaluation for values of ^ of the form z = e'"^. The magnitude of the
w frequency response at frequency is the mtio of the length of the vector V] to the length
of the vector v^ shown in Figure 10.13(a), The phase of the frequency response is the an-
gle of V| withrespecttotherealajtisminustheangleofv2'Funhermore, the vector Vr from

764

The z-Transform

Chap 10

m^n\

20

UTiTt circle
H

Z-plan¨
IT

10
L^ a = 0.95
J1 V._ a = 0,5

7T U>

d = a95

Figure 10.13 (a) Pol¨ and lerc
vectors for the georrctnc determina-
d tion t^^ Ir^uency respond far a
first'ordar system for a valiw oJ a be-
tween and 1; (b) magnitude of the
frequency response for a ^ 0.95 and a = 0,5; (c) phase d the frequency ^ response for a = 0,95 and b 0.5.

the Eero at the origin to the unit circle has a canstAnt length of unity and thus has no

effect on thfc magnitude of HU^'^y Tfre phase contributed to H(e''^) hy the leto is the

w angie of the zero vector with respject to the real axis, which we see is equal to

For
.

< < m a 1, the pole vector has minimum length at*t> = and monotonically increases

length as tit increases from zero to tt. Thus, the magnitude of the frequency response will be

Sec .

1 0.4

m Geometric E^al uation ot the Fou rier Tran&To rm f ra tne Pole-Ze ro Plot

7 65

maximum ^Qj = and will decrease monotonically as f^i increases from to Tr.T^e angle
of the pole vector begins at zero aiid increases monotonically as io increases from zero to TT. The resulting magnitude ajid phase of H(e^'^) aje shown in Figures J 0,1 3(b) and (cX respectively, for two values of a.
The magniiude of the parameter a in the discrete-time first-order s/stem pJays a role sLmilai to that of the tiine coustant t for the contitiuous-time firstnarder system of Section 9.4,1. Note first that^ as ijiustraced in Figure 10 t3> the m^tgnttUiie of the peak of fJ(e^*^) at <(> - decreases as 'a| dccicases toward D. Also, as was discussed in Section 6^6. 1 and illostrated in Figures 6.26 and 6.27, jt^ \a\ d^reases, the impulse response decays nriote shajrply and the step response settles more quickly. With multiple poles, (he speed of response associated with each pole is related to its distance from the origin, with those closest to the ongiu contributing the most rapidly decaying terms in the impulse re-
sponse. This is further illustrated in the case cf second-order systems, which we consider
next.

1 0.4.2 Second-Order Systems
Next, let us consider the class of secotMJ^jrder systems as discussed in Section 6.6.2, v^ith
impulse response and frequency response given in eqs. (6.64) and (6.60), which we re-
spectively repeat here as

and

1 -2rcosd*-J^-hr^(!-J^

^

< where < r 1 and È fl ^ tt. Since J/((;>") = Hiz\=^,^, we can infer from
eq. (10,68) that the system function^ conesponding to the i-transform of the system
impul^ response^ is

^^^^ = t^^r>

^ dl ,.1 ^

.,2 -

(10.69)

The poles of Ii(z) are locatM at

;, = r^*^ Z2 = re-^\

(10.70)

and there is a double w:ro at ^ = 0. The pole-zero plot and the pole and zero vectors with
< < ^ ir/2 are illustrated in Figure 10. I4(a^. Li tMs case, the magnitude of the frequency

response equals the squaire of the magnitude of v i (since there is a double zero at the ori gin) ttivided by the product of the magnitudes of \a and V:i* Because the length of the vector Vi

from the zero at the origin is 1 for all values of a?, the magnitude of the frequency response

equals the reciprocal of the product of the lengths of the two pole vectors V2 and V3 . Also>

the phase of the frequency response equals twice die angle of T| with respect to the real

asis minus the sums of the angles of vj and Vi. In Figure 10J4(b) we show the magnitude

of the frequency response for r = 0.95 andr = 0.75, while in Figure t0.14(c) we display

We the phase of Ui^^"^) for the same two vaJues of r.

nÈ>te in particular that, as we move

766
Unit circle

The z-7ransfofm

Chap, 10

Figure 10.14 (a) Pole imctors Vi,

\2, ^ind Va jjsed In the ge<imeitric cal-

culation of the frequency responses for

a se>CDnd-Dr4er syslerrt; (tr) magnitude

of the frequency re&ponse correspond-

ing to the r^jprocal of ths product

of the rengths of the pole vectors for

^ r =^ 0.95 antf r

0.75; (c) phase of

the frequency response for r - 0.95

^ and r 0.75.

w -- aJong the unit circJe from = toward w ^, the length of the vectoiv? fiT^t decreases
and then increases^ with a minimum length in the vicinity of the pole location, mtij = 9.
k 'Hus consistent with the fuct ihai the magnitude of the frequency response peaks for u>
near ^ \vrhen the leng^ of the vector \^ is small. Based oti the behavior of the pole vectors, it IS also evident thiit as r increases toward unity, the minimum length of the pole vectors
will decrease, causing the frequency responiie lo peak more sharply with Increajiing r. Also, for r near unvty, the angk of the vector v^ changes sharply for (o in the vicirity of Or Furtbcrmofc, from the form of the impulse response [eq. (iO.67) and Figure 6.29] or the

Sec. 10.5

Properties of the z-Trac^sform

767

step response [eq. (6.67) and Figure 6.30], we see, a.s we did with the first-order system. that im the poles move closer to the origin, corresponding to r decreasing, the in^puhe response decays mote rapidly and the step fespunse settles more quickly.

1 0,5 PROPERTIES OF THE Z-TRAN5FORIVI
As with ihi^ other transforms we have developed, the ^-tranAform possesses a number of properties that make it an e?ttremely valuable tool in the ^udy of discrete- ^v me signals aJ>d systems. In this sectitsn, we summariy^e many of these pioperties. Their derivatiuns are
^alogoufi to the derivations of properties for the other tiansfomis, and thus, many are left
asesercisea at the end of the chapter. (See Problems 10.43 and 10,51-^0.54,)

!0,5.! Linearity
If
and
then

^^ x^ltt]

Xiizh with ROC = R,^

^ X2[n]

ROC X.iz). with

= R-.,

I

^

I

ROC H \ ^Xi[nl + bxiln] ^'^-^ aXiit) + bX^iz), with

containing if ,

fi> i

n0.7l)

ROC As indicated, the

of the linear combination is at Ifcast the intersection oi Rt

+ and R2. For sequences with rational ^-tran^forms, if the poles of aXi(x) hXiU) consist

of all of the poles of ^1 (z) and X2{z) (i.c, if there is no pole-zero cancellation)^ then the

region of convergence will be exacdy equal to the overlap t>f d\e individual regions of

convergence. If ihe linear combitiation is such that some zctos arc introduced that cancel
A poles, then the region of convergence may be larger. simple example of this occurs
when X] [n] and x:2[fi] are both of infinite duration, but the linear combination is of finite

duratioTi, In this case the region of convergence of the linear combination is the enttre

^-piane, wiiti the possible excepdon of aero and/or infinity. For example^ the sequences

- > a"u[n] and a'^uln i] both have a region of convergence defined by [z\ jtf|. but the

= sequence corresponding to the difTerence iifu[n} - ti^ti[n - 11)

6[n] has a region of

convergence that is the entire ^-plane.

10.5.2 Time Shifting
If
-- x[n] * ? X(a with ROC = R,

76B

Th5 z-Transform

Chap. 10

therj

x[n -- Ho]

-"(1 X{zX

ROC with

= ff, except for

the possible additioii or <lele-

tion of the origin or infinity.

(10.72)

> Because of the mu^tiplicaticm by z~'^\ for no

poles will be introduced iU ^ - 0,

which may cancel correspon^Jing zeros of X(ji) ar ; = 0. Consequently, ^ - itiay be a

ROC p^ie ofi'^^^Xd) wbile it may not be a pole of X(c), In this case the

for z ' ""X(x) equals

ROC < ttie

of ^(z) but with the trigin deleted. Similarly, if no 0, zeros will be introdxiced

at z = 0, which may caiiceJ corresponding poles ofX{z) ^ z ~ 0, Consequently, ^ =

¨ may bea ^erf} of ^""^'A'f;) while it tnay not be apoleof A'(^). In this case z = is a pole

ROC ROC t>f z""^.V(z), and thus the

for z' "^X{z) equals the

of X{z) but with the ^ = ¨

deleted

10.53 ScaJing in the z-Domain
If
-- x[n\ * > XUl with ROC = ft.
then

<10,73)

ROCof where l^ol^'^ is the scaled version of J?. That is, ifz is a point in the

X<;), then the

point jzol^isin theROCof Jf(s/^). Also, ifX(j)hasapole(orzero)at 5 = ti,theii X(zJzo)

has a pole (or zero) at ? = zo^.
= An important special case of eq. (10,73) is when zo ^'"*^- In ^is case, |^1^ = R

and

^X(È ,j^n-n x[n]

;fctft
z).

(10.74)

The Lcft'haad side of ecj. ( LO,74) conesponds to muttiplicatian by a complex cxponentiai
sequence. The right-hand side can be interpreted as a rotation in the ^-plane; that is, ail
^ pole-zero locations rotate in the È-plane by an angle of a^u> illustrated in Figure 10.15.
This can be seen by notii^ chat if X(0 has a factor of die fornv 1 -- oi~', Uvea A'(^~J*^;) will have a factor 1 - ae^'^z^ ' , and thus^ a pole or ^eio dtz - ain X(z) vriil become a pole or zero at z = ae^^ in Xie'^'^^z). The behavior of the z-transform on the unit circle will
then also shift by an angle of cu(i. This is consistent widi the frequency -shifting property
set forth in Section 5,3.3, where tnuUiplication with a complex exponential in the time domain was shown to con^espond to a shift in frequency of the Fourier transfonn. Also,
= in che more general case whai 4^ ro^'^ in eq. (lO.'JS), the pole and zero locations are
rotated by iwy and staled in magnitude by a factor of ro.

SflC, 10 5

Properties of ^e z-Transfonn

Unit circle

z-plane

7i9
dm
z- plane

Figure 10. T5 Effect on the pole-zerD pbtof tim&'doniain multiplica-
tion by a complex exponential sequence tf^"; (a) poie-zerc pattern for the z-transform for a signal x[n)] (b) pole-zero pattern for the z-transform of

10.5.4 Time Reversal
If
-- x[n] < ^ X(xl with ROC = R,
then

-- x[-n] * ^Xi\X with ROC = ^

^ ROC ROC That is, if is in the

for x[n], ttieti 1/zy is io ttie

for x[~n].

(10.75)

10.5,5 Time Exp^ansion
As we discussed in Section 5,3,7, the continuous-lime concept of time scaling does not
directly extend to discrete time, since the discrete-time indei is defined only for integer
-- values. However, the discrete-time concept of time expansion i.e.^ of inserting a number
-- of zeros between successive values of a d iscrete-time sequence x [ ¨] can be defined and
does play an important role in discretc-dmc signal and system analysis. Specifically, the sequence j;fi^[n], introduced in Section 53.7 and defined as

= JC(*>[l]

ji[n/k\
0.

if n IS a multiple of k if n is not a multiple of k

(10.76)

-- has k 1 zeros inserted between successive values of the original signal. In this casc> if
-- x[n] ^ > XizX with ROC ^ R,

.

770

The z-Transform

Chap. 10

then

XU -VujU] ^--^

).

with ROC = R''\

00,77)

ROC Thatis, if ; tftinthcROCofXiz), thenthepoinl^^^^ ii in the

of XU^^X Also, i^ X(z}

has a pole (or zero) a.i z = a.^ then Xiz^ ) has a pole (or zero) 3X z = a^'^

The interprelation of thLs result ffillows from the power-seiies foim cif the z-

transfomn, from which we see that the coefficient ^{ the term z ^ equals the value of

the signal iil time ;i That v^, with

+^
K{z) = 21 Mn\z-\ rr= -^

it Follows that

2 ^ ^(;*) -

4*

;rlnK;*)"" =

4"]^ ^"

(10.78)

EAamining

the right-hand s ide o f eq .

[1

7. 8 ), we see tJi at the only rcmis that appear are of

the form z

*", ^n other words, ihe

coefftcicnt

of the

terni

"'"
z

in this

power

series

equals

m m L if is not a multiple of k atid equals x[m/k\ if is a multiple of Thus, the ij^verse

transform of eq, ClO.78) n Jiuii"]-

TO. 5,6 ConJugcTtron

If

-- ROC x[ri] ^ * X(?X with

= /?,

then

(10.79)

jM¨]

ROC .rfi'X with

=- Jf.

(10,80)

Consequently, if x{n] is real, we can conclude from eq. (10.80) that
X{1) = X'{z*l
Thus, if Jf(^) has a pole (or zeroi at ^ = zi}j it must also have a poU (or ^ero) at the com-
^ plex conjugate point ; z^^. For example, the transform X(z) for che real signal x[rt] in
RxPTTiple 10.4 has poles at ^ = (l/3)i> J^^^,

10.5.7 The Convolution Property
If
xy[n] ^^X,Ul with ROC = R^.

.

Sec. ID 5

Proptrtiesol the z-Transtorm

?7t

and
then

-- ROC xi[n] ". > X^Cc), with

= Rj,

--z

ROC xi[n]* Ji2[n] * ^ XiU)X2(zy with

n cantaining /f, R2.

(10.81)

ROC Just an with the convoluticm property for the Laplace transform, the

of

X\(i)X2{z} mcludes the mtersection of if 1 and R2 and may be iarger if pole-zero can-
ceJlarion occurs in the product. The convolution property for the ^-tranKform can be
A derived in a variety of different ways. formal derivation is developed in Problem 10,56, A derivation can also be carried out analogous to that used for the convolution property for

the continuous-time Fourier tranijform in Secrion 4,4, which relied on the inierpretatioii

of the Fouriei traiisfonn as the change in amplitude of a complex ej^ponential through an LTI system.

For the ^-transform, there is another often useful interpretation of tfie convolution
property. From the definitlcm in eq. (10.3), we recognize the z-trarsfH^rm as a series in

z' ^ where the coefficient of z^" is the sequence value xln]. In essence, tiie eoovolution
property equation (lO.Si) states that when two polynomials or power series Xi(z} and

X2{z) are multiplied, the coefficients in the pelynomial representing the product are the

convolution of the coefficients in the polynomials Xi (z) and X:(^), (See Problem 1 0.57).

Exampre 1 0. T 5

Consider an LTI system for which
y[n] - h[i:]*x[nl

(10.82)

where

h[n] = &[n] -ft[n- IJ.

Note that

^ 6[nl - 3[?i - l]

i - z-\

(l(].83)

ROC with

equal to the entire s-planc except the ori^m. Also, the ^-transform in

eq. n0.83>hasaz*ro at^ = 1. Fromeq. (10,81), we see thai if

-^ x[n]

Xiz). with ROC = R,

then

^ y[n]

fl - z~^mz).

fKl.&4j

ROC with

equal to R, with the possible delehon of c =

Note tl^at for this system

= and/oi addition rtf :

I

= y[nl

[S[n] - S[n - l}] *£ ^n] = xln\ - x[n - Ij.

-,

772

The z-Transform

Chap. 10

That is, y[n] is the first difference of the sequeacc Jt[n). Siacethe first-difference opera-
tion is commonly thought of as a discrete-time counterpart to differenrjatiDii, eq. (1U.S3)
can be thought of as the ^-trdnsfonn. caunteqiart of the Laplace transfoniidiffeTentialion
pmpeny presented in Section 9.5,''.

Ex¨impre T0.T6

Suppose wc now consider Ute inverse of first differencing, namely^ accumulation or sum matjfiti. Specifically, let w[nl be Uw running sum of i[n]:

^n

win] =

xik] = tilFi]*x[nl

(10,85)

Then, using eq. (lO.Sl) together with the ^-tramsform of the unit siep in E\art^)le 10.1
we ^e that

ROC > with

including at least the intersection ofV? with 1^1

I. Eq,( 10. S6) is the discrete-

time c-lran&form counttipan of thii integration property in Section 9.5.9.

T 0.5.8 Differentiation fn the 2-Domdirt

If

*^ x[n]

ROC X(z]. with

= if,

then

(10.87)

This property follows in a straightforward tnanner by differentiating i50i:h sides of the
expresfiioti for thez-transform given ineq. (10J), As artexatupleof the use of this property, lef us apply it (o determining the inverse ^-ti^iisform considered in Example \0. 14.

Example 10. T 7

If

> X{z) = logd + a:"') \z\ \a[

(lO.-sei

(hen

^ -,^ _?^ ,,:,1^]

=

(,| > ^.

az

] + ^z~^

(10.89)

By differentiating, we have converted the z-ttunsform to a rational expnession. The
invert ^-cransform of the righc-handsid&oreq. (10.89) can be obtained by using Exam-
pie 10. 1 together v/\t\\ ihe time- shifting property^ eq. (10.72), set forth in Secti(>n 10,5.2.

Ssc. 105

Prop^rti^s of the z-Transform

Specifically, from Eitjimpk 1 0. 1 and ihe linearity property.

az i -f-

'

Combining this with the time-shifting property yields

-- J a(-(i)"~*u[n - 1] " *

'"
__^ .

> z]

|fl|

Consequently.

773

Example 10.18
As another example of the use of the differentiation property^ considei determirLin^ the
inverse z-transform for

From Example 10. J,

X(z)=--^^^. (\ - az ^)^

\z\>H

^ a>^u[n]

^

^

> .

1^1

14

.

a092)
(10.93)

and hence,

10.5,9 The JnJtiaf-V^lue Theorem
If jcLnl = a¨<0, then
;t[0] = hmXiz).

(1095)

m This property follows by oonsidering the liirit of each t&rm individuaJly the ex-
< pression far the ^-transform, with xl n\ ^ero for n 0, With th[S constraint.

^ X(z) =

x[n]z-".

rt=0

M ^ 2" ^ ^,

> -> Ofor rt 0, v^beitas for rt = 0, ^"" = 1. Thus, eq. (10.95) follows.

As one consequence of the initial- value theorem, for a causal sequence, if x[Q^ is

finite, thea liiii^_£K^ ^(e) is finite. Consequently, with X{z) expressed as a ratio of polyno-

mials in z, the order of the numerator polynomial cannot be greater than the order of the d¨ndminaior polynomial; or, equtvalently, the number of finite zeros of Xiz) cannot be greater than the number of finite poles.

774

The z-Trar>stOfTTT

Chap. 10

Exampfe 10.19
Tlit ini lial-v alue theorem can alsf? be u.seful in cltecking the "oirecEness of the rtransfonrL;;akulaticinfc!rasLgr\al Fi^r^nample.tonftidervhtijgnal x]n] mExijitap^c ^0.1,
= FiDineq. (10.12), we see ihat 401 L Also, rroiueq. f 10.14),

Mm X(z] - lim

T-- r "; ^-

^ r

^'

which is consistent with the initial-value theorem.

10.5.10 Summary of Properties
in Table 10,1, we summarize the propettias of the ^-trdiisform.

10.6 SOME COMMON z-TR><\NSFORM PAJJ^S
As with the inverse Laplace tianjifoTtn, the inverse ^ transfomn caji often be easily evalu-
ated by iixpresfiingX(7) as a. lirearcoivibiiiation of simpler terms, the mverse tranKfomiK of
which are recognizable. fnTkble 10.2, we have listed a number yf useful --traiksform pairs.
Each of these can be developed from previous examples in cotr^binatit^n with the propertics of ihe z-transform lifted in Table lOj , For example, transform pairs 2 and 5 follow
directly from Example 10. U and transfcrtm pair 7 is developed in Example 10, IS, Hiese,
toge^er with the time-reversa] and time-shifting properties set forth in Sections 10,54 ajtd 10.5.2, respectively^ then lead to transform pairs 3, 6, and 8. Transform pairs 9 ;ind 10 can be developed using transform pair 2 together with the linearity and scalii^ properties developed ia Sections 10,5.1 and 10.5.3, respectively.

10.7 ANALYSIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF LTl SYSTEMS
USING z-TRANSrOflMS

The ^-transform plays a paitijciilarly important r^le in the analysis aivd rcptcscmation of diiict^te-tiine LTl systeiUK, From the convolution property ptesettted in Secii^m 10.5.7,

Viz) - H{z)X{zl

i 10.96)

where X(zh y{z)^ aii<l Hit) are the s- trans fonms of the system input, output, and impulse

response, respectively. Hiz) is referred to as the system function or transferfunciion of the

= system, forz evaluated on the unit circle (i.e., for:; e^"'), H{z) reduces to the frequency

ROC response of the system, provided that the unit circle is in the

for H{z). Also, from

our discussion in Section 3,2, we know that if the input to an LTl system is ihe compieA

ej^ponential signal ;r|n] = ^, then the output will be .^"(3)^. That is. r" is an eigenfunction

of ^e system, with eigenvalue ^iven by Hiz), the ^-transform of the itripulse response,

MMiy propertitsof a system can be lied directly to characteristics of the poles, ?6ros.

and region of conveigcnce of tht system function* and in this section we illustmie some

of these relationships by examining several impoinant system properties and ar important

class of systems.

-^

Ci

u

S "" 5,

- -^

a; ee Oil'

u

2>

^ .E

II

1^

IS s&

^ >^ ^
I

CE

2

It

CE

V-s-^^^^

3"

^ IL VS"

I

o
to

Q0.

5' ^

0^

I

s ;=

-If

t-J

c:

I^ I

I

^

I

^fl r- t^ *n ¨^ ^rl
doo d

775

--

776

Tnez-Transtorm

Ctiap 10

TABLÈ I 0.2 SOME COMMON z-TRANSFORM PAIRS

SLgud

transfann

ROC

1. ^[^3 2. u[n\
^ ¨f-^ 11

]

1

I

ZI

J
I-;-'

6. - a'^n[-n - Ij
7. rttI^'H[flj
t. -fl¨"H[-^-lj

1

at '

I

ai "l -

I

az '

(1 - a? n^

^_---
(1 - ¨; 'r

9. EcO!iÈt>uJ^Jji[n]

> \z\

I

AH ;^ cscep-1

m C (if > 0) or

^ m (if

-^ 0)

> z\

la|

< z\

'a

I

^ si

'c¨|

;| '^ -ff|

> z\

1

10. [fino^DirJuIn]

1

> ::!

I

12. [t^ iinttiijiilHrti

-- + 1 [2rootjEDfilj '

r-; '

10. 7. T CausaJity

A causal LTl system has an impulse response h[ri\ thai is zero for fl < 0, and therefore ih

ROC right-sided. From Property 4 iri Section 10.2 we then know that the

oi H{z) is the

m exterior of a circle the z-plane. For some systems, e.g., if /i(rtl = 5[¨],sothaif/(;> = 1

ROC the

can extend all the way in to and possibly include the origin. Also, in general, for

ROC a right-sided impulse respoti^e, the

may or may not iaclnde infinity. For example,

if h[n] - 8[n + I J, then//(^) = z, which has a pole at infinity. However, as we saw in

Pri^perty S in Section 10.2> for a causal system the power senes

ROC does not include any positive powers of ^, Consequently, the

include*; iiifinity. Sum-

marizing, we have the foDow principle:

ROC A discrete-time LTl system is causal if and only if the

of its system function is

the extfcrior cf a circle, iticluding infinity.

Sec. 10.7

Analysis and Charaoten^ation o1 LTI 7-Transforms

777

If H\z) is rational, then, from Property 8 in Section 10.2, for the system tote causal,

ROC the

must be outside the outeTmost pole and infinity must be in the ROC. Equivalently,

-- the litnit of H{z) as z > ¨ must be finite. As we discussed in Section 10.5.9, this is

equivalent to the iiuineratoT of Hiz) having degree no larger than the dencuninatar when

both are expressed as pcjlynomiaK in z^ That is

A discreie-time LTI system with rational system function f^iz) is causal if and only if:

ROC (a) the

is the exterior of a circle Dutside th& outermost pole; and (b) with H(z)

expressed as a ratio of polynomials in z. the order of the numerator cannot be greater

than the order of the denominator.

Example 10.20
Con&^ider a system with system function whose algebraic expression i'.
mz) - -2z' + z

ROC Without even knowing (he

for thi^ sy&tem, we can conclude that the system is not

causal, because the numerator of Hit} \s of higher order than the denominator

Example 10,21

Cons-ider a system with system hjnctian

> ^^^) = ,

\ , + ,_!,.-, . kl

2

(10.97)

ROC Since the

for this system functjcn is the exterior of a circle outJiide the oulennost

pole, we know that the impulse response is right-sided. To determine if the system is

causal, we then need only check the other coiidiliMi required for causality, namely thai

H{z), when expressed as a ratio of polynomials in z, has numerator degree no larger than

the denominator. F{ir this &KampLe,

H{z) -

f^

= ^^-^.

(iom)

so that the numerator and deno minator of H<z} are both of degree two£ and consequently
we iz^a conclude tliat the system is causal. This can also be verified by calculating the inverse transform i}fff(z). In particular, using transfonn pair 5 in Tab^e 10.2, we find
that the impulse re^rtonse of this system is

u[nl
< Since h\n] = foi n 0. we can confimi that the system is causal.

(10.99)

fO.7.2 SUtbiJity
As we discussed in Section 2,3,7, the stabilit> of a discrete-time LTI system is equivalent to
Its impulse response being absolutely summable. In this case the Fourier tratisfonn of Afn]

77S

The z-Transiorm

Chap. 10

ROC oocivergcs* and consequently^ the

of H{z} must iiiclude the unit circle, Sununarizing,

we obtain the following result

ROC An LTI syFitem is stabie if and only if ttie

of its system function lf(z) includes

= the unit uirtle, \z\

I.

ExampJe T0.22

ROC Consider again the system fufiction in eq. (10.97). Since the associated

is. xht region

h J^l > 2, which does not include the unit circle, the system not stable. Thii can also be
m seen by noting that the imptrise response eq, (.10.99) is net abso^ute^y summiWe. If,

however, we coti.^hider a system whose system function haji the same algebraic expression

ROC ROC < < as in eq. (10.97) but whose

is the region 1^ f^' 2, ftier the

does contain

the unii circle^ fto that the corrcsptfinding system is nonc^iusal but stable. In thjs case,

u^ing iransform palTM 5 and t ftvui Table 10.2, we find that the conesponding unpulse

reS|Kihf¨e i^

H fi[n] = l^\ ulnl-T'ul-n-

(LO.IOOJ

which is absolutely summable'

ROC Also, for the third possible choice of

associated with the algebraic expression

< c^u^ for ff(z} iKi eq. 1 10.97), namely, |;j 1/2^ the corresponding system is neither

ROC ROC (since (he

is not outside the outermost pole) nor stable (since ihe

does not

include thf unit rircLe) Uni can also be seen from the impulse response, which (using

transform pair 6 in Table L0.3) is

h{n] - - i) +2"K[-n- 1].

As Example 10,22 illustrates, it is perfectly possible far a system to be stable but

not causal. However, if we focus on causal systems, stability can easily be checked by

examining the locaaons of the pole&. Specifically, foi acausal system with rational system

ROC ROC function, the

is out&idc the outcrmosn pole. For this

to include the unir circle,

= 1^1

1, ail of the poles of the system must be inside the unit circle. That is:

A causal LTf system with rational system function H{z) is stable if and only if all of
-- the poks of iif(s) lie inside the unit circle i.e,,thcy must all ha\c magnitude snialler
than L

Example 10,23
Cyti^ideT a cEtusitl system with system functioii
H\z) - ^I --- -a;T''
which has a pole ai z = n. For this j-ystem to be stable^ its pole must be inside the unit
< circle, i.e., we mu^t have \a\ 1. This is consistent with the condition fur the absolute = summability of the com^sponding irnpulse response h[n] fl"u[rt].

;

Sec. to. 7

Analysis and Characterization tf LT( z-Transforms

779

Example 10.24
The system function for a second-order system with vomplejt poles wai given in
eq. (10,69). ^pct:Lftca]ly.

fi{z) =

1

1

-(2rcosS)^-i

+

-1' r'z

00.101)

= with poles ktated at z\

=

and f^f^^'

^<

re~^** Asv^umLng cau^alit), w-e see xhat the

ROC > ROC IS outside the outermost pole (i.e., |;| \r\), TTie pfile-zertj piot dud

foi this

< < > sys(eni are shown in Figure i0.f6 for r I and r 1. Fur f I, the pole^ are inside

ROC the unit circle, the

includes;, the unit circle, and ihercfonc, ih& system is stable. For

> ROC r 1, the pfle& are outside the unit circle, the

doe% nut inLlude the unit circle, and

the sy5teiTi is unstable.

U^lit Circle

/

z-pla

i'

^ t If :h ^

'1

'x^ xj

(¨*

Am

Unit Ctrt-le

^_
^

/
H. f

Z'pla

'0y^ '' .-""^

' '

"^^X^-

;-A'\

\V,^^y \ \ \ '

Tn 1

/ "

'

rN<

J

"* -I

(a)

fc)

Figure 1 0. T6 Pole-jcro plot for a second-orber system ^ith comple?( potes'

1 0.7.3 1.TI Systems Cliaracterized by Linear Constant-Coefficrent Difference Equations
For systems characterized by linear constant-coefiicient differeture equations, the properties of ihe :-transfortn provide a particularly convenient procedure for obtaining the system funcrioti, frequency response, or time-domain response of the system. Let us illustrate this with an example.

Example 10.25
Consider an LTl system for vhich (he input x{n\ and t>utpul vln| satisfy the linear con Stan t-ccefficient difference equation

n >[nj - -vln - - x[n\+ ^x{t\ \\

<I0.102)

780

The r-Transtorm

Chap. 10

Applying Ehc ^-tTiinsffntn u> both sides <ifcq. (tfl. 102), and using the linearity property
set forth in Section 10.5-1 and the tiint-shifting property presented in Section lfi.5.2, we
obtain

[>r
From eq. (10.%}. then.

y(z) = xi^)

,, 1

1

(I0.t03>

aU)

- I

^z '

This proviiies the aL^ebi^ie expression for Hiz), but not the region of tronvergence.

In fact, there are two distinct itnpuli^e responseij that are consistent with the djlTerence

equation (10.l02^ one right sided and the other left sided. Corr-eHpondin^l}', there arc

ROC two different choices for the

associated with the algebraic e^^prc^^siun (1(1.104),

> One^ |e[ 1/2^ is associated with the assumption that h[n] is right sided, and the other,

< 1^1 1/2, is associated with the assumption that h[n] is left sided.

ROC > Consider firat the choice of

eqnal to |z| 1 . Writing

ffU) -

^ L + -1 È

1

_ ,, I

I

2^

we can use transform pair 5 in Table 10.2 ^ together with the linearity and time - sin fting
properties, to find the corresponding impulse response

ft\n] = flj^[^]+i/ij ¨[TM-l].

For the other choice of ROC> namely, < \z\ 1, we can use rransfomi pair 6 in
Table 10.2 and the linearity and time-shifting propeTties> yielding

> In this case, the system is anticausal [h[n] = for n 0) and unstable.
For the tnore general case of an ^th-order dififei-eiice equation, we prtx;eed in a man-
ner similar to that in Example 10.25, applyi tig the ^-transform to both sides of the equation and usirig the linearity and time-shifting properties. In particular, consider an LTI svstem for which the input and output satisfy a linear constant -coefficient difference equation of the form

Sec. 10.7

Analysis and Characteri7ition oriTI z-Transfarms

781

Then taking ^-transformH of both sides of eq. (10.105) and using tbe linearity and timeshifting properties, we obtain

^

M

or

SO that

M
Z^.^"
ni)

WiÈ note =n particular that the system function for a system satisfying a linear constant-

coefficient difference equation is always rational. Con&iscent with our previous exumpJe

^nd with Che related discussion for the Laplace transform, the difference equation by itself

ROC does not provide information about which

to associate widi the algebraic expression

Mil). An additional constraint, such as the causality or stabiUty of die system^ however,

serves to specify the region of convergence. For ejcample, if we know in addition th<it the

ROC system is causal, the

will be outside the outermost pole. If the system is stable, the

ROC must include the unit circle.

1 0.7.4 Examples Relating System Behavior to the System Function As the previous subsections illa-.trate, many properties of discrete-time LTI systems can
be directly related to the system function and its characteristics. In thi& section, sve give
several additional exampJes to show how ^-iransform properties can be used in analyzing
systems.
Example T0.26
Suppose that we are given the foUowLDg infomnation about an LTI system: 1. Tf the input to the system is X|[h] = (1/6)" u\n\. then the output is

=
j'lLfl]

¨iiT..ofi

u[nl

where rt is a real number.

in = 2. If^c^ln] = {-!)", then the output IS >2[rt]

J(-

As we now show, from

ihesfi two pieces of infttnuation, we can determine the system function Hiz) for this

system, incJudingthe valtie of the number a, and can aKo immediately deduce a number

of other pjopeiiiej of the systerti.

The ^-transforms i?f the -vignalj speciiied Itj the first piece of tnfonmadaft are

7 87

Ttie i-Trarstoim

Chap. ^

=a

3^1 (^)

1 - \z-'

10
1- ]^-J

(fl + l0)'[5+ f)j-'

> ,

.

1

-.

afl.it>S)

From cq. {ID.96X it follows that the ajgebrijc expression for the system function is

Funheimore, we know that tbejro^Mase to X2[n] = (- 1)" muit &qual (-1)" mulbplied

by the system fLincbon Hiz) evaluated atz = -- L Thus ^iri the second piece of irifor-

wt ntation given,

see thiit

7

,, ,

[{a+ 10) + 5+ |][^J

4 '" "

(|)(^)

Solving eq. (10,110), we find that a == -9, so that

- Ji/(s)

.^.^ .

(10.111)

or

1 - 13,-1 + 1,-3

ntj.ii2)

or. hTiiHy,

- -2

i^r -1- i

(10.113)

ROC Also, from the cotivoludt^n property, ve know that the

of Y\{l) must include

at least the intersections of the ROCs of Xi[z) and fI(zX fiiamining the ihree possible

< < < U > ROCs fof Hiz) (namely, \z\

1/3, 1/3

l^j

1/2. and

1/2), we find that the only

choice that IS consistent iMth IbeROCs of Jf|(z)aDd l'iU)is|si> 1/2.

ROC Since the

for the system includes the unit circle, we know that the system

is stable. Furthennore. from eq (10.113) with/f(;) viewed as a ratio of polynomials in

z, the oaSer af the nutnerator does not e:iceed that of the denominator, and thu^ we ean

conclude that the LTl system is causal. Also, using eqs. (10.112} and(10.I06), we can

write the diffcreiicc equation that, tDgeihei with the condition of initial rest, cliaractenzes

the system:

y[n^ - ^y\n - I] + ^y[n - 2] = xln] - ^jf[n - 1] + ^x[n - 21

Bxsmple 10.27

md Consider a stable

causal system with impulse respansc h\n\ and rational system

function Hiz). Suppose it is tftown that H[z) contains a pole at e = 1/2 and a icto

somewhere on the unit circle. The pt^ise number and locations of all of the other poles

Sec. 10.@

System function Algebra and Block Diagram PepresentatJons

783

and ^icros aro unknown- For each of the following $tat¨ment5£ let u^ determine wKctber
we can ticfinittly say that i( is true, whether we can deflnitcJy say that i! Is false, cr
whether there is insufficient inromiation given to detetmine if it is true or not;

(a> (F((m>''Mfll) converges.
(b) Hie'n = for some w.
(c> /i[nl hasfiruiedurfition. (dj h[tt] is real.
(^i ^tnJ = nf^Ii] * f*[^]\ is the impul^ response of a stable system.

Statement (a> is true. T{<I/2)''ft[rtl} corresponds to the value of the^-tnmsfomn^
fi\n] at E = 2, Thus, its convergence is equivalent to the point ; = 2 being in the ROC.

Since the system is stable and causal, ah of the poles of H{z} are inside the unit circle,

ROC = and the

includes all the points outside the unit cijcle, it^luditig ; 2,

Statement (b) is true because there ls a zem on the utiit circle.

ROC Statement (c) Ls false because a finite-duration sequence must have an

that

includes the entire ^-plane, except possibly ^ = and'or z - £. This is not consistenL

with having a pole at ^ = \f2r

mm Statement (d> requirei that /f(^) = fl*{z). This in

implies that if (here ti

= a pole (zero) at a nonreal location z

Zxs, there must also be a pole fzcro) at z ^ ^.

Insufficient infomiation \^ given To validate such a conciusion.

= Statement (e> i^ true. Since the sjittm ia cau-sal^ h{ri\

C for n < 0, Conse-

-- < quenlly£ h[n\ * ft[nj

for /i 0; i.e., the system with h[n\ * h[rJ] as its impulse re-

spoase is causai. The same is then true for ^[t\\ -- n[h{Fi\ * h[ri]]. Furthermore^ by the

convolution property set forth in Section 10,5J, the system function corresponding to

the impulse response h[n] * b[n] is H\z}, and by the ditTerentiation property presented

in Section 10.5,8f the system hincti[>n corfcsponding to ^\n\ is

(10U4J
From eq. (10.114), we can coocluide that the poles of G(;) are at the same liKUtions at.
those QiH{z), with the possible exception of the origin. TTiei^fore, since H{z\ has all its poles inside the unit circle, so must G{z). It follows that ^[n] is the impulse response of a coaxal atid stable system.

T 0.8 SYSTEM FUNCTION ALGEBRA AND BLOCK DIAGRAM
REPRESENTATIONS
Just as with the Laplace transform i;i cotitinuous tim¨, the ^-transform in discrete tirne allows us to replace time-domain operations such as convolution and time shifting with
algebraic operations. This was expltjited iti Section 10.73, where we were able to replace the difference-equation description of an LTl system with an algebraic description. The
use of the ^-transform to convert system descriptions to algebraic equations is also helpful in analyzing interconnections ofLTI systems and in representing and synttiesiiing ftystetris as interconnections of basic system building blocks.

784

Tne Mransfo rm c hap. l o

1 0.8. 1 System Functions for tnterconnectlons of LIT Systems

Th^ system function algebra for analyzing discrete-time block diagrams such as series, parallel and feedback interconnections is exactly the same as that For the corresponding
continuous-time systems in Section 9,8. 1 , For example, the system function for the cascade of two discrete-time LTI systems is the product of the system functions for the individual systems in the cascade. Also, consider the feedback interconnection of two systems, as
shown in Figure 10. H. it is relatively involved to determine the difference equation or im-
pulse response for the overall system working directly in the time tiomain However, with the systems and sequences expressed in terms of their r- transforms, the analysis involves only algebraic equations. The specific equations for the interconnection iif Figure 10. 17 exactly parallel eqs. (9J 59K9-163), with the final result that the overall system funttion for the feedback system of Figure 1 0. 1 7 is

= M{z) =

ff\(z)

X(z)

I +Hiiz)H2(zy

(10.115)

*- ytr^l

Ftgurv 10.17 Faadback kiterconnectlon of two systems.

1 0.fi.2 Block Diagram l?epresentations for Causaf LTI Systems Described by Difference Equatiorrs and Rational System Functions'

-- As in Section 9.S.2, we can represent causal LTI systems described by difference equations
using block diagrams involving three basic operations in this case, addition, raultiphca-

tion by a coefficient, and a unit delay. In Section 2.4.3, we described such a block diagram

We for a first-order difference equation.

first revisit diat example, dii.s (inie using system

function algebra^ and dien consider several slightly more complex examples to illustrate

the basic idea?; in constructing block diagram representacioo$.

ExampJe 10,28

Consider the causal LTI system wilh system tuDctlon

f^iz) I _-i 1-i^-'

(10.116>

Using the results in Section 10,7,3, we find that this system can also t>e Jcstribed by the
difTeredce e<|uatioji

y[n]- -y[/i- 1] ^ x[n].

SeCr 10,8

System Function Algebra and Block Diaoram Representations

785

togettier with the condition of inttiaJ rest. In Section 2.4.3 wc constnicted a block diagrajn
representation foi a first-order system of this form, and an equivalent block diagram
tcorrespmiding to Figure 2.2S with a = -]fA and b = 1) is stiown in Figute 10.18(a).
Here, i"' i& the system function of 9 unil delay. That is, fnun tbe time- shifting propetty, the input and output of this system ate rtlated by
w\n] = - y[n I].
The block diagram in Figure I0.1ii(a) contaIn.s a feedback loop much a-s for the system considered in the previous subsection and pictured in Figure 10-17 In fact, with some minor mcxJiH^^ations, we can obtain tbe equivalent block diagram shown in Figure 10. 18(bX which is exactly in the form shown in Fi^re 10 17, with //|(j) = [ and ^2iz) = -]/4^~'. Then, applying eq. 00.115)^ we can verify that the system function of the system in Figure ] 0, 1 8 is given by eq . ( 1 0. 11 6).

xln]

1
4
<a)

x[n]

^G>

ñ- y[n]
'
z'
w(nl
yinl

i--'

Figure 10.18 (a) Block diagram representations of the causal LTI system
in Example 10.25; (t>) equivalent block diagram representation.
Example 10.29
Suppose we now consider the causal LTI system with system futiction

H{z) -

I - k-' :\-2z-'i

(iaii7>

As eq. (10.117) sugge^tii. we can think of this system aii the cascade of a system with

- Wc system ftinctiop 1/[1 - (l/4)s"'] and one with system function 1 2^ '

have il

m lustrated the cascade in Figure 10.19<a), in *hicli we have used the block diagrEun

Figure 10.18(a) to represent 1/fl -(l/4)^-iJ. We have also representect I - 2s"^ usmg

a unit delay, an adder, and a coefficient multiplier Using the time-shifting property, we

then see that the input v[n] and output y[n] of the system with system functbn 1 - 2; '

78&

TTiez-Transform

Chap. 10

are related by

y[n\ - v[n] -- 2v[n ^ 1],

While the btock diagram in Figure 10.19(a) i& ceftainly a valid represfntatioD of
the system iaeq. (10.117), it h^ an inefficiency whdse eQminadoA Leads to an. alternative
block-diagrain refuresent^on. To see this, note that the input to both unit delay elemeats in Figure 10.19(a) is i^[j]], so that the outputs of these dements are identical; i.e,,

= w\n] =^ s[n]

v[n - 1]^

ConsequenPy, we need tiot keep both of these delay eletnents, and we cam simply use the output of one rf thein as the signal to be fed to both coefficient multipliets. The result
IS the block diagram representation in Figure 10^190), Since each unit delay element
requires a memory register to store the preceding value of its input, the represeatation in Figujc 1 0, 19(h) requires less memory than that ia figure 10.19(a>.

ñ- yl"!

xlnj

<^

-*-y[n]

m

-2

(Jb)

Figure 1 0,f9 (a| Blocl<- diagram r^preser>tatians tor the s^terr in Exam-
pie 10.29; (b) equivalent block-diagram representation u&ing only one unit de-
lay etefnent.

Example 10.30
Next, consider the second-order system function

H(z) =

1

1
(lOllSi

which is also described by the differeiice equation
>"I¨] + ^yrn-l]-^Wrt-2-] = Jttnl.

(10.1i9>

--

Sec. 10.8

System Function Algebra and Block Diagram Rapr9$¨ntation5

787

Using the same ideas as in Example 10.2S, we obtain the block-diagram representation for this system shown in Figure 10.20(a), Specifically, since the two system function blocks in this figure wjth system function z ' tu'e unit delays, we have
/[rtl-Mn-ll.

so that eq. (10.119) can be re'U'dtten as
y\n\ = -^y\n - I] + ^y[n - 21 + x\i\\.

it[n]

&

-p-vN

e\ m

Q\ £ it{nj

,

,

X nj

<a)
ñG>
m
o

e[n]
-+-y[n]
O

z

Ci>

yln]

J-1
Figure 1 0.20 Block-diagram representations for the system in Exampie 1030: (a) direct form; {b) cascade lorm; {:;) paraiiei form.

788

Ttivz-Trirslorm

Chap. 10

or
y[n] = -\fln] + |c[rtl + 4"!

which is ejiactly ^bat the figatc represents.

The block diagran) in Figure 10.20(a) is commoDly referred to 3s a direct-form

rcpresenialioD, since the coefficictiU appearing in the diagram can be detEnnined by

^m inspection

the coeFAcients appearttig in the difference equatior or, equlvalently,

the system function- Alternatively, aÈ in continuous time, we can obtain both caseadr^-

form and psTalieiform block diagrams with the aid of a bit of i^ystetm fmiction algebra.

cm Specihcall>, we

rewrite eq. ( 10. 1 1 S) as

"''' ^ 'TTF^)(r^J'

'''''''

which sugg^ts the caicade-fcHtu representation depicted in Figurc 10.20(b) in which
the s}'stenn ^ represented 3S the ca^ade of two systems coirespondin^ to the two factors
in eq,(l 0-120).
Also, by pecfomiing a paitial-fraction expansion, we obtain

1

1

Hiz) =

3

J.

3

+ 1^-'
1

i-i=-'

wJiich leads to the parallel-fonnFept^escntacion depicted in Figure 10.20(c).
Example 10.31
Finally, oonsider the fiystem function

Writing

suggests representing the system as tbecascadeoftlie system in Figure 10.20(a) and (he
system with s^ystem functioD I - ^i' -- |;"^. However^ asiaEjtample 10,29. the unit
delay elemejiCii needed to implement the ^rst tertn in eq. (10.122) also produce the de-
layed signals needed in computing the output of the second systerrt The result is the direct-fbnn block diagram sbowti in Fifiure 1 0.2 1 , the details of the construction of wtuch ire eximined in Problem 10J8. TTie coefficients in the direct-form representation can be determined by inspection from the coefficients in the system fimctioa oteq. (10. 1^1).
We can also vmte H{z) in the forms
¨(^)= ^^4^Wi^4^

Sec. 10.9

The Unilateral ^TransfDrm

xM --*-0

*-(^ " ñ* vl^^

789

O--A EH--ˋ
i

1
3

Fjgure lO.Jf Direct-form representation lor ttie system in EximpJe 10.31.

and

fiiz) = 4

5/3
1+^;-^

1473
l-i^

(10.124^

Bq. no. 12^) su^ests a qaitadc-fonn repie^tnlation, while eq. ([0.124J leadi to a parallel -form block dia^nim. Thtw; vss also conyidered in Problem 10 3S.

The concepts used in constructing block-<liagram representations in the preceding examples can be applied directly to higher order systems, and several e^an^ples are considered in Problem 10.39. As in continuous time^ there in typically considerable flejLibiUty
-- in doing thin e.g., in hovv numerator and denominator factors are paired in a product rep-
resentation as in eq. (10 J 23), in the way in which each factor is implemented, and in the order in which the factors are cascaded. While all of these ^ariations lead to representations of the same system, in practice there are differences in the behaviur of the different
block diagrams. Specifically, each block-diagram representation of a system can be tranjilated directly into a computer algorithm for the iTnplementaUoii of the system. However, becaj.se the finite word length of a computer necessitates quantiz^ing the ci>effidenls in the block diagram and bec^usi^ there is numerical roundoff as the algorithm operates^ each of these representations will lead to an algorithm that only appn^xi mates the behavior of the original system. Moreover, the enrtrs in each of these approximations will be somewhat
different. Because of these differences, considerable efft>rl has been put into examinmg
the relative meriLs of the various block-diagram representations in terms of their accuracy and sensitivity to quanti/ation effects. For discussions of this subject, the reader ma>' turn
t{) the references on digital signal processing in the bibliography at the end of the book.

10.9 THE UNILATERAI. z-rRANSFORM

The form of the z-transfcirrn considered Ihui far in this chapter is often referred to as the bilateral z-transfarm. As was the case with the Laplace transform, there i^ an alterna-

tive form, refened to as the unilateral z-transform, that is particularly useful in analyzing

causal systems specified by linear constant-coefficient difference equations with non/ero

me initial conditions Ci.c, systems that

not initially at rest). In this section, we introduce

the unilateral i-transform and illustrate some uf its propeitiss and uses, paralleling our

discussion of ttve unilateral Laplace tri\nsform va Section 9.9.

790

Thez-Tradsform

Chap. 10

Th¨ unilateral ^-b^nsforni of a sequence x[n] is defined as

3C(0 = Y.x[n]z'\

(10.125)

m As previous chapters^ we adopt a convenient shorthand notation for a signal and its
unilateral z-transform;

^ iiz
4,,] .f.^ X{z}

liZf jc[fi]].

(iai26)

The unilateial ^-tiansfonri differs from the bilateral transform in that the summation is
cairied out only over nonnegative values ofrt, wheiher or not x[n] is zero for n < 0. Thus

the unilateral ^-transform of ^[nj can be thought of as the bilateral transform of j:[nl(i[n}

(i.e., x[n] multiplied by a unit step), bn pardcular, then* for any sequence that is zero for
< n 0, the unilateral and bttateraL ^-transforms will be identical. Referring to the discussion

of regions of convergence in Section 10.2, we also sec that, since T[nlu(rt] is alwiy$ a

right-sided sequence, the region of convergence of 3C(z) is always the exterior of a circle.

Because of the close connection between bilateral and unilateral ^-tran^forms, the

calculation of unilateral tiansfortns proceeds much as for bilaterd transforms, with the
^ caveat that wa must take care to limit the range of summation in the tianfifonn to n 0.

Similarly, the calculation cf inverse unilateral transforms is ba^icaDy the same as for bilat-

ROC eral transforms, oivc4 we take into acc^uiit the fact ;hat the

foi a unibteral transform

is always the exterior of a circle.

T 0.9, 1 Exampies of Unljateral z-TVansfomis and rnverse Transforms

Example 10.32

Consider the signal

^ x[n]

a''tf[n]^

(iai27)

< Since x\n] = O, h Ot the unilateral and bilateral cransfbrms are equal for this example,
and thus^ in particular,

^<z>= T\ ---^ia-zT-

W>|d|-

(10128)

Example 10.33

Let

x[n] = a''^^u[ji-^ il

(10.129)

= In this case [he unilateral and bilateral traiisfomis are twt equal, since jr[- 1]

1^0.

The bilateral transform is obtained from Example 10. 1 and the dme-shifting properly set

forth in Section \0 5.2^ Specifically,

Xtz) ^

- _>

> \z\

\a[

(10.130)

--T

Sec. 1 0.9

The U niiatsrai /-Transfo rm

In cantr^sl, the utulai;ctal trunsfomi is

H.

2 =

*'"'' ^""'

or

791

Exampfe 10,34
Consider the unilateral E-trsuisfOTm

X(z) =

-^

i

i

(lfl.132)

In Example iO.% we consLder^ the iaverse tran^fonn For a bilateral ^-transfoni; Xiz)

of the same focrm as in eq, (10.132) and for ^veral different ROCs. In the case af the

ROC unilateral transfotni, the

ÈduEt be the eictehor of the circle of radius equal to the

^U)-- > We largest magnitude of the poles of

-in this instance, all points z w^itlrlrj

1/3.

can then invert the unilateral tiansfc^m exactly as in Example 10h9, yielding

xhl = [i ] u[n] + 2Ji ] u[n} for n ^ 0,

(iai33)

In ft^, (10, 133), we have emph^izcd tht fact that ifiveriteumUteT^ E-transfomis pr{>vide us with InfoimaLian about jr[n] only fi>r rt ^ Q.

Another approach ts> inverse traiLsfonns introthiced in Section \0,X namely^ identi^ing the inverse transforms from the coefficients in the power-series expansion of the
z-transfbrni, also t;an be used for unilateral transforms. However, in the unilateral case, a
cor\&tmnt whkb must be ^tisfted is that, as a consequence of eq^ 00.123). ^e power-
series expansion for the transfonn cannot contain terms with positive powers of z- For
instance* in Example 10.13 we performed long division on the bilateral transform

^(J> - T-^--

(10.134)

in two ways, corresponding to the two possible ROCs for Xiz). Only one of these choices,

ROC > namely, that coiresponding to the

\z\ |a|£ Isd to a series e^cp^Mon without positive

powers of z. i.e.,

1- az^

792

The z-Transform

Chap. 10

and this is the only choice for the eKpansioji if eq. (10.134> represents a unilateral trans-
fonti
Note that the requirement that 3C(z) have a power-series expansion with no terms with positive powers of ^ iniplies that not every function of ; can Èn? a unilateral ^ -transform.
In particular, if we consider a rational funcLion of z wntten as a ratio of polynomials in z
(not in z~^)-. i.e.,

g,

00.136,

ROC then for this to be a utiilateTai trdnsform (with the appropriately chosen

as the ex-

terior of a circle), the degree of the numerator must be no bigger than the degree of the

denomitifltor.

Example 10.35

A simple esampk lUm^rrating the pieceding point is given by the rational function in
cq. (10.130). whit;h we can wiilc asaratioqf polynrnniaJs in^:

>
-- -.
Z- a

(10.137)

There are (\v(j possible bilateral transforms that can be associated with this functicm,

> namely those corresponding to the two possible ROCs, |;| -:: |ci| and |^| \a\ TTie choice

> < \z\ IfllcorrespoDdstoaright-sidedifequeilce.butno/toasJenal that is zero for iillrt 0,

= sinte its inverse tranfiform, which is given by eq. (10.12^), is nonzem for a

-[.

More generally, if we associate eq. (10.136) with the bilateral transform with the
ROC that is the exterior of the circle with radius given by the magnitude of the largest

root of tf(z\ then tht inverse transform wiJl certamly be right sided. However, for it to

< ^ caw bne zero for d/Jrt 0, it rtiui^t also be the

that dfrgreft(;7(dt

degree(ff(^>)

1 0.9.2 Properties of the Unilateral z-liansform

The unilateral ^-transform has many important properties, some of which are identical to

their bilateral counterparts and several of which differ in significant ways. Table 10.3 sum-

marizes these properties. Note that we have not included a column explicitly identifying

ROC ROC the

for the uniJateral ^-irajisfonn for each sjgnal, sint^e the

of any ujiiJateral r-

ROC transform is always the extenorof adrcle.Foreiample^ the

for a rational unilateral

Laplace transfonti is always outside the outermost pole.

B> ct>ntrasting this table with the corresponding Table 10.1 for bilateral ^-transtorms,
-- we can gain con.siderable insight into the nature of the unilateral cratisfcrrn. In particular
several properties namely, linearity, scaling in the ^'-domain, time e?^pansion, conjuga-
-- tion, and differentiation in the ^-domain are identical to their bilateral counterparts, as

is the imtial-vaJue tbeorem stated in Section 10.5,9, which is fundamentally a unilateral
< transform property, since it requires x[n] ^ G for /i 0. One bilateral property, namely,

the time reversal property set forth ir S&ction 10.5.4, obviously has rio meaningful coun-

teipart for the unilateral transfonn, while the remaining properties differ in important ways between the bilateral and anilaieral cases.

Sfic. 10,9

The Unilateral z-Trans/orm

793

TABLE >0.? PROPERTIES OF THt UNILATERAL /-TRANSFORM

Property
--

Signal

UnUsterflJ j^-iyansfonD X{i)

X2\n\

L[jicanry T^rac d&iay
Time advance
ScnliJig in the ^-diimain
Time CApciEi^ioji
ConjvgaiHin Convdlmioii ^aiuvujning
that ri[n] and ^nin]
an jdenticaily 7cm fur fi <0)
FiTsl dnffcrence
AccuntulatioTi
Different] arioi in the
z-domain

+ /3X,,[n\ bx-^yit] xln- IJ
Jf[TM4 IJ

ZvAnl
a"x\n]
jTfH] Xi\Ti\ * Jj[n]

^ m n

?nJt for an.y

- - jflnj

rt[ii

1]

njffH]
Initial \^ik 'HKbrem j[01 = liiii3C(È)

aaCi<i) '^ frSC,<zi
i-'XU\^ xi-\\ SCiz\ - ? j[0]
3:(È*> È)C(i'>
a^(;>a:>u)
(J -e '^Èi:a)-4-l)
T~^^(^>
d^U)
^ dz

Let U5 examine the difference in the convol ution propeity first. Table 1 0. 3 states that

n < if jc^ [rt] -^ jC3[n] -^ fnar all

0. then

"HZ

Xi{T(\*X2[n\

a:iU)a:2UX

(iai3S)

Since in this case the unilateral and bilateral transforms are identcal far each of the¨

signals^ eq, <J0.138> follows from the bilateral convolution property. Thus, the system

analy^^is and system function algebra developed and used in this chapter apply without

change to unilateral tyansforms^ as long as we are considering causal LTl systems <for

which the system function is both the bilateral and the unilatetal transform of the impulse

response) with inpuLs that are identically zero for a < 0. An example of such appjicabon

- is to the accumulation or summation property in Table 10.3. Specifically, if x\ti\

for

< n 0, then

^ iiz jf[t] = x[n}* u[n]
^=n

1
l~z-'

(10,139)

As a second example, consider the following:

--

794

TTie ^'Tmnsform

Chip. 10

Example 10.36

Consider the caosal LTI system described by the difference equation

y{n} + 3y\n - 1] = j:[n],

(10.140)

together with the coDdition of initial Test, The system functiDn for this system is

^(^) =

_l_
1 + .3,;-1

(10.141)

Suppose that the input to the system is j[/i] = arÈr[n], where ¨ is a given constant. In
this case, the unilateral (and bilateral) z-tran&fcirm of the Qutput y[n\ is

%z) = ^(z)3C(z) = (I +3z !)(! -s-')

(3/4>ff
1 +35 '

(3/4)o
-z-i'
I

Applying Example 10.32 to each tenti ofeq. (10. 142) yields

(in. 142)

y[n] ^ a i + (^f-^'" u[n].

(10.143)

An important point to note here is that the convolution pmperty for unilateral z-
transforms applies only if the signals x^[h\ and x^Ch] in eq, <10.138) are both identicaJly
< zem forn 0. While it is generally true that the bilateral transform of j;t[nl*.v*[rt] equals
theproduct of the bilateral transforms of jci [n] and jtiIm], the unilateral trauKfonn of ^ [n]*
JC2[n] in general does not equal the prtxiuct of the unilateral transforms if jti [nl or x^in] is
nonzero for n < 0. This point iÈ explored further in Problem 10.41 Much of the importance of the unilateral z-tmn.sform lies in it& application to analys-
ing causal systems and, in particular, systems characterized hy linear constant-coefficient
difference equations with possibly nonzero initial condicions. In Section 10,7 we saw
-- how the bilateral transform particularly the shifting property for bilateral z-transforms
could be used to analyze and compute solutions for LTI syNtems characterized by such
di^fference equations, together with the assumption of initial resi. As we wiD now sec,
the shifting property for unilateral transforms, which differs from it's bilateral counleipart, plays an mialogous role for initialized systems.
To develop the shifting property for the unilateral tran.sform, consider the signal

y[n] = x\n- 1].

(m.J44)

Then

£a
= x[-l] + Y^x[n-\u-''

1=0

Sec. 10.9

The Unilateral j-Transform

or

795

SO that
^(j) = jr[^^] + z'^^iz).
By repeated application of eq. (10.146), the pnilateral transform of
w[n] = y[n - I] = x[n - 2]

O0A46)
(10.147)

is

WU) - x[-7] + x[-Uz-^ +;-^9C(ry

(10.J48)

Continuing this iterative procedure, we can also detennine the unilateral transform of x[n--
m] for any positive valu¨ of m, Eq. (10.146) is sometinws rcfencd to as the time delay property, since y[n\ in
eq, (10,144) is a delayed version of x\n]. There is also a time advance property for unilateral transfontis that relates the transfonn of an advanced version tif x[n] to 9C(e). Specifically, as shown in Pfobiem 10-60,

+ - x[n

^e-- 1]

> zti:^{z)

zxiOl

(10,149)

1 0.9,3 Solving Difference Equations Using the Uniiaterai
2-Tirstnsform
The following exatnpie illustrates the use of unil^iteral z-tianafomis and the time delay
property to solve linear constant-coefficient difference equations with nonzero initial cqji -
ditions^

Example 10.37

Cotijiidcr agiiin lh& difference equation (10.140) with x\n] = au[n] and with the inilial
condiiinn

vL-lJ = $.

00.150)

Applying the unilateral transform to both sides of eq. (10.140) and using the linearity
and time delay properties, we obtain

^<2) + 3^ + 3-"^^(j) =

"_, .

" 1

2^

Solving foT^U) yields

flO,15ll

-rrh - ñy(^)

^ a^3.-xi- V 'y

^'¯-'''^

79^

The2-Transform Chap. 10

Referring to Example lO^^Sand^ in paniculoj:^ eq, ( 10.142)^ we see that thesecojid

term un the rij;ht-haEid side of eq. ( IG. 152l equaJs the unilateral ^-transfonn of the re-

O spoji!>eof the system when the initial condlUon in eq. (in. 130) IS zero

= 0). That is,

this term represents the response of the cavi):aLLT1 system described by eq. flO. 140), to-
gether with the condLiiDs of initial rest. As in continuous-time, thi^ response i,s frequently

refeiixd to as the zero-siate response, i.e., the response M^hen (he initial condition or st^te

]s zero.

ITie first term an the rigtil-hani ftide of eq. (10, 1 52) is interpreted as the unilateral
-- transform of the z^jo-itiput response i,e.. the response of the system when the input
is zero (a = 0). The zero-injMJt responhe is a ]ine:ar function of the value ^ nf the ini-
tial condition Moreover, eq, (10.152) illustrates the fict that the solution of n linear

constani-coefficient difference equation wi[h nonzero initial state is the superfHisi^iou of

the zercHstate and zero-inpul res|wnses. "Hie zero-state response^ obtained by setting the

iaitial coiidiintn Ki zero, corresponds to the response of ihe cau.ial LTI ftysiem deJiAed by

the differeace equation and the condition of initial rest. The zero-input respcnse is [he re-

sponse to the initial condition ilone with the input set to zero, Probiems 10,20 and 10.42

pruvide other example.^ illushaiing the use of unilateral transforms to solve difference
equ^dons ^vith ncnzero mitial conditions.
Finally^ for any values of ¨ and ^, we can expand *y(:) in eq. (10 152) by the w method of partial fractions and invert the result obtain y\n]. For example, if a = 8
and^ = U

and applying the unilateral transfcmn pair in Example 10.32 to each term yields

^ v[rt] = [3(-3r +2]ulnl, foin 0.

(10.154)

10, TO SUMMARY

In this chapter, we have developed the z-transform for discrete-time signal k and system-s.

TTte discussion and devdopmetJt closely paralkfed tfte comesponditig treatnient of the

Laplace transform for continuous-tincie signals, hut with some important differences. Foi

example, in the complex j-plane the Laplace transform reduces to the Fouiier transform on

the imaginary axis, whereas in the complex z-plane the z-transform reduces to the Fourier

ROC transform on the unit circle. For the Laplace transform the

consists of a strip or

half-plane (i,È,, a snip extending to infinity in one direction), whereas for the ;-trai\sform

ROC the

is a ring, perhaps extenditig outward to infitiity or inward to include the origin

M With the Laplace transf<in7J, time-domajn characferistics such aÈ the righi-sided, left-

sided, or two-sided nature of a sequence and ttie causality or stability of an LTI system can be associated v^ith properties of the region of convergence, \n particular, for rational

^-transforms, the$e time-domain characteristics can be associated with the pole locations

in relation to the region of convergence.

fifeL^aui^e of the properties of ^-transforms, LTI systems, includitig those described

by linear constant-coefficient difference equations, can be analyzed in the trEuisform domain by algebraic manipulaiions. System functit>n algebra also is a very useful tool for

the analysis of interconnections of LTi systems and for the construction of block diagram

representations of LTI systems described by difference equations.

CTiap. 1

Problems

797

For the most part in this chapter, we have focused on bilateral ^-transforms. However*

as with the Laplace transfomi, we have also introduced a second form of the ^-transform

known as the unilateral ^-transform. The unilateral traDsform, which can be viewed as the

< bilateral transform of a signal whose values for n

have been set to zero, is particularly

useful for analyzing systems described by linear constant-coefficient difference equations

with nonzero initial conditions.

Chapter 10 Problems
The first section of problems belongs to the basic category, and the answers are provided in the back of the bock. The remaining three secdons contain problems belonging 10 the basic:, advanced, and extension categories, respectively.
BASIC PROBLEMS WITH ANSWERS
10*1£ Determine the constraint on r - |zj for eat;h of the foU^Jwing sums to converge:

¨--i

ri-i

10,2, Consider the signal

x[n] = -Ufrt-3].

Ujie eq. (10,3) to evaluate the ^-transform of this signal^ and specify the corresponding region of CLmvergente
lOJ. Let

^Ifi] = (-l)"u[n\ + a"u[-n - nol

Determine the constraints on the complejt number a and the integer n^^ gjveji that
the ROC of ^U) is

< 1

< Id

2.

10*4, Consider the signal

i 0.

n >(1

Determine the poles and ROC for X{z).
10£S. For each of the following algebraic expressions for the z-transfomi of a signal,
determine the number of ieros in the finite ^-plane and the number of zeros at
infinity.

79a
(l-lz-'Xl-|.--') (1 -::^ )( 1-23-')
(b)

TTie z-TranEforn

Gtrap. 10

10.6- Let Jt[n] be an absolutely suinmablc signal with rationa] ^-transform X(z). If X<z}
is kncwn to have a pole at ; = 1/2, could x[ti\ be
(a) a finite-duration signal? (b) aleft-side4 signal? (c) a right-sided signal? (d> a two-sided signal?
10.7. Suppose that the algebraic expression for the ^-transform of x[tt] is
1 -. L-^-2
n + i.-^)(i + |.-'-^,-^)-
How many different regions of convergence could correspond to X{z)7
10.8, Let x\n] be a signal whose rational ^-transform X(;) contains a poie at ^ ^ 1/2.
Given that

is absolutely summable and

is not absolutely Gumnndble, detennine whether x[n] is left sided, right sided, or two sided. 10£5^, Using partial-fraction expansion and the fact that
fin*l the inverse s-iransform of
10.10. Consider the following algebraic expression for the z-transform X(_z} of a signal
-:*rrtl:
1+ \t-'^

.

Chap 10 Problems

799

ROC > (a) Assuming the

to be |s| 1 /3, il^ long division to determine the vaJues

ROC < (b) Assuming the

to be \z\ 1/3, use long division to determine the values

10.11. Find the inverse ^transform of

Mt} = * 1,024

1,024 -z"^^ 1-^^-1

> > 1^1

0.

1.12. By considering the geometric interpretation of the magnitude of the Fourier trans-
form from The pole-zero plot, d&tennine> for each of the following ^-transforms, whether the coirespojiding signal has an approximately lowpaj^s, bandpass, or highpass characteristic:

10*13. Consider the rectan^lar signal

1,

^n^5

0, otherwise

Let

gin] = x[n] - x[n - \l

<a) Find the signal g{n] and directly evaluate its ^-transform. (b} Noting that

n

^ = X[Ft]

g[kl

use Table 10. 1 to determine the s-transfonn of X(zX 10,14. Consider the triangular signal
in-], 2 ^ n ^ 7

[ 0,

otherwise

(a) Determine the value of no such thai
gin] = x[n] * x[n - nol
where x[n\ is the rectangular signaJ consi*lered in Problem 10. 1 3 (b) IJse the convolution and shift properties in conjunction with Xiz\ found in
Problem 10J 3 to determine G(z). Verify that your answer satisfies the initial-
value theorem.

BOO

The z-TransfOfm

Chap 10

10L15. Ut

y[n] = \-\ u[n].

Determine two distinct signals such that each has a z-transfcnm Xiz) which satisfies
both of The following conditions:
I. mz) + X(-z)]n = Yi^X
1. X{z) has only one pole and only one zero in the ^ plane.
1(^.16. Consider the following system functions for stable LTI t^ystetns. Without utilizing the inverse j-transfoim, determine in each case whether or not the corresponding system is causal.

(a)

,-i (1

-^^-')(1

-

\z-

T -" _
(b> -

È+ 1
(c>
-1

10. 1 7. Suppose we are given the following five facts about a particular LTI system S with
impulse response h\n] and ^-transform Hiz):
L h\n] is real.

2. h[f\] is right sided.

hm 3.

fl{7) -= 1.

4, H{z) has two ?:eros,

5, /J(s) has one of its poles at a nonreal location on the circle defined by [i| --^ 3/4. Answer the following two questions;

(a) Is 5 causal?

(b> Is 5 stable?

10.18.
^[n]

Considers causal LTI system whose input xlnj and output v[n] are related through

the block diagram representation shown in Figure PlO. 1 8.

ˋ

*-Q ^v[rt]

*T

z'

ˋ--I

0

,r

1

z'

Figure P10.1 8
(u) Determine a difference equation relating y[/il and jrl/i].
(b) Ik this systetn stable"^
10.19. Determine the unilateral ;-transfortn of e^ch of the following sisals, and specify the corresponding regions of convergence:

Ch^p. 10 Problems

SOT

(a) :r,[T.] =(\ru[n + 5]

(b) X2[n] - S[n + 3] + R[n] + 2"4-n]

= (c) x^lrt]

i\)\"\

10.20. Consider &. system whosa mput x[n] and ouvpuv y[n] are related b>

^-tfl- IJ + 2j[nJ - x\n].

(a) Determine the zero-input response of this system if y[- 1] = 2.

(b) Determine thezero-statercsponseofthe system tQ^e input \[nj = {U4yii[n].

^0 (c) Determine the output of the system for n

when x\n] = ( l/4)"u[n\ and

y[-^\ =2.

BASIC PROBLEMS

10,21- Determine the z-transfonn for each of the following sequences. Sketch the pole-

zero plot andindicate the region of convergence. Indicate whether or not the Fourier

transform of the sequence exisis.

(¨) sin + 5]

(b) 8ln - 5]

(c) (-jrwLrti
(e) <-iru[-fl-2] (g) 2"u\-n] + (iru[£ Ij

(d) (ir^'MtH + 3]
(0 (i)M3-£]
(h) (|r-2u[rt-2j

10,Z2. Determine the z-transfonn for (he following sequences. Einpress aJl sums in closed

form. Sketch the pole-zero plot and indicate the region of convergence. Indicate

whether the Fourier tranafDmn of the sequence exists,
(a) ilrWin + 41 - uin - 5]} (b) ^CiV""

(c) |/tJ(^)H

<<l> 4"cos[^fi + f lu[-n - 1]

10£23.

Following

are

several

c-tran sforms .

For

each

one,

determine

ihe

inverse

^-transform

lining both the method based on the partial- fraction expansion and the Taylor's se-

ries method based on the use of long division.

1-7"' I

~^' -<^) -

W>

i-

^f^r ^<^^ -

< 1^1 J-

--

.

802

The z-Transform

Chap. 10

10.24. Using the method indicated, determine the sequence that goes with each of the
fiollowing ;:-trans forms: (a) Piiitial fractions;

X(z) ^

^--

--. and x[n] is absolutely summable.

(b) Long division:

Xiz)

=

I - U-'
\~^:^ and Tfn] is right sided.

Ic) Panial fractions:

z- Xiz) =

j
-^

-

r~r7^ ^z

and Jt[rt] is absolutely summable.

10.25. Consider a right-sided sequence j[ji] with ^-transform

X(z) =

j

'

.

(i-|r')(i -z-')

(P10,25-1)

(a) Carry £ut a partial -fraction expani^ion of eq, (P10,25-l) expressed a.s a ratio

of polynomials in ^ ' , and from this expansion, determine Ji[n\.

(b) Rewrite eq. (PlO.25-1 ) as a ratio of polynomials in z, and carry out a partial-

Fmm fr:icti(>o estpansion of X{z) expressed in terms of polynomials in z.

this

expansion, determine x[n], and detnonstrate that the sequence obcaitied is

identica] to that obtained in part (a>.

10.26, Consider a left-sided sequence x[n] with z -transform

X(z] =

j--^

.

(1 - ^;-'Xl-^-i)

(a) Write X(z) as a ratio of polyntjmials in z instead of z" '
(b) Using a partial -fraction expression, express X(z) as a sum of terms, where each temn represents a pnle frotn your answer in part (a).
^c) DeteTmine x[n].
A 1(^27, right-sided sequence x\n] has s-transftjrm

< Determine x[n] for n 0.
10,28. {a} Etetermine the ^-transform of the Kequence
A[n] = 5[n]-0,95S[n-6].
(b) Sketch the pole-zero pattern for the sequence in part (a).
ic) By considering the behavior of the pole and zero vectors as the unit circle
is traversed, develop an approximate sketch of the magnitude of the Fourier transform of j[n].
10.29* By considering the geometric determination of the frequency response as discussed in Section 10.4, sketch, for each of the pole-zero plots in Figure P10.29, the mag-
nitude of the associated Fonrier transform.

Chap, to Prodiems Unit circle

S03

Circle of radius 0.9
icy
Frgure PlO.79

804

The J-Trarsform

Chap. 10

10.30. Consider a signal y[n] which is related to two signals _t! [n] and t^lH] fey

where

^dn] = 1^1 u\n] and xjln] - (-1 u[nl

Given that

-- (3''M[fl] <

>

> j-, \z\

\a\,

use properlies of the ^transform to determine the ^-transform KU) oi y[n].
1031. We are given the following five facts about a dJscrete-time signal x[n} with z-

1* jf[Fi] is real and right-sided.

2. X(z) has exaocly two poles.

3. X{z) has two zeros at the origin.

= 4. Xiz) has a pole at :;

jgf^^^.

5. XO) - I
Determine X(z) and specify its region of oonvergence.

1032, Cohslder an LTl system with impulse re.sponse

and input

M¨l = f a'\
[0,

n^ n<

x\Inn\] = i^ ^Z''
[0,

^" ^- ^n ^ N - ]
.
otherrww:ise

(a) Determine the output y[n] by eiplicitly evaJuating the discrete convolution of x[n] andM"]-
(b) Determine the output y[n\ by computing the inverse :c-transfonn of the product of the ^-transfonas of the input and the unit sample response,
1033, (a) E>etermine the system function for the causal LTl system with difference equ^i-
Cion

(b) Using ^-transfoTms, determine y[n] if
^N =(^l wW

Chap. 1D Probtems

805

10,34. A causal LTT system is described by the difference equation - y[n\ - - y[fi 1] + y[n - 2] + jc[n I].
(a) Find the system function i/(s;) = y(i)/X(^) for this system. Plot the poles and zeros i}fH(z) and indicate the region of convergence,
(h) Find the unit sample response of the system, (c) You should have found the .system to be unstable. Find a .^Uble (noncausal)
unit sample respond that satisfies the difference equation,
10-35. Consider an LTI s^ysiem with input x[ri\ and output y[n] for which

y[^- I]- pli] + >ln + lJ = J^[fil

The system may or may not be stable or causal
fiy considering the pole-zero pattern associated with the preceding difference equation, determine three possible choices for the unit sample response of
the system. Show that each choice satisfies the difference equation.
1&.36, Consider the linear, discrete-time, shift-invariant system with input x\n] and output y[n] for which

>^[n-l]-y>[¨J + j[rt+ IJ - x[nl

The system is stable. Determine the unit sample response.
10J7. The input x[ii] and output y[ri] of a causal LTI system are related through the bJock'diagram representation shown in Figure P10.37.

-- K(n] ^(T)

*{T) *-v{n)

Figure PI 0.37

(a) Determine a difference equation relating y[n] and x[n]. (b) Is tbis system stable? 10J8. Consider a causal LTI system 5 with input x[n] and a system function specified as
Hiz) - Hiiz)H2<zX
where

= //ia)

1

+ _ 7 1, T

1 ^-2

i

i^

806

The ^-Transtorm

Chafl 10

and
''ill
H2{z) = 1 - ^r' - 2^

A block diagram corresponding to H{z) may be obtained as a cascade connection
of a block diagram for Hyiz) followed by a block diagram for Hiiz)- The result is shown in Figure P10.3S£ in vhich we have also labeled die intermediate signals fi[nl, e^Irt], f\{n\ and /2[/i].

-- [n] ñ-{^

-- *-{È) £-yln]

0-- 'i

.-1

e|[n]

iy[w]

~i--o

,-1

,-1

^[n]

U\r\

Figure PI 0.38

How (a)

is ^1 [rt] related to /][¨]?

How (b)

is ^^[/t] related to /;[¨]?

<c) Using your answers Co die previous two parts as a guide, construct a direct-

form block diagram for S that conLuns only two delay elements.

(d) Draw a cascade-form block diagram representation for S based on die obser-

vation that

'1 + \z-^\{\ -2z -I

//U>-

+ ] __

^1

^z

l-I.-

<e> Draw a parallel-form block diagram representation for S based on the obsei--
vation diat

Hiz) = 4 + 5/3 l^^r'

14/3
1-^;-^

14X39. Consider die following three system functions corresponding to causal LTI systems:

1
(1-^-1 + 1^-2)(1--h- ' + kz ^y

1

-w {\-z ' + ^^^>(1-

'+z-^)'

M3{Z) =

_ ,-J
(1

i
^+ ii z-^Ki ' z"^ + u--y

1

Chap. 10 Prabtems

S07

(¨) Fcr each system funt;tioii. draw a direct-form block diagram. (b) Fnr euch system furciion. draw a block diagram that t:<irres*ponds to the cas-
cade connection of two seeond-order block diagrams. Each second-order block:
m diagram should be direct fornn.
(c) For each system function, determine whether there exists a block diagram rep-
resentation which is the cascade of four f^rsi-order bbck diagrams with the
constrajrit that all tbe coefficient multipliers must be real,
10.40. Determine the unilateral ^-trajisfonn for each of the sequences in PVt^bJem 1 0,2
10.41. Consider Vhe folhjwing two signals:

U) = Jftl¨l

"f"^ ^^'

Let 9Cj(s) and Xi{z) respectively be the uoilatergl and bilateral ^-transforms of

xiln], and let S^^'-) and X2U) respectively be the unilateral and biiateraJ z-

transforms of ,V2[rtl.
(a) Tate tha inverse bilateral ^-transform of X\{z)X2{z) to deiermiQC g[n] =

JK\[n] * X2[n].

^ (b) Tate the inverse unilateral ^-transform oi iiz)SC2iz) to obtain a signal q[n]

^ for n

U Observe that q\n] and ^[n] are not identical for n '^ 0.

10'42, Fnreach of the following diffeience equations and associated input and initial conditions* determine the zero-input and zero-state respenses by using the unilateral
z- transform:
(a) jLfll + 3>l¨-ll = x\nl

yi-n = 1.

M (b)

-
y|;(l

^y{n

-

\]

=

x[n]

- ^x[n -

- x[ri]

u[n],

v[-l] ^0.

yM (c)

- iv[¨ - I] - 4^1 - ^-x\n - IL

= -t["1

"Lfll,

yr-1] - I-

ADVANCED PROBLEMS

\0A3. Ccnsider an even sequence x[n] (i.e., x[n] =^ x[-n]i with rational ^-transfonn x<zy

.

SOa

T^re /-Transform

Chap. 10

(a) From the definition of the ^-transform, show that

Xiz) -X[-|.

(b) From ^ourresulls in part (aK show that if a pole (zero) of X(r) occurs at z = zo. then a pole (zero) must also i>ccurat z = Uziy.
(c) Verify the result in part (b) for each of tlie following sequences:
(1) 3{n+ \]+a[ft- I] {!) d\n+ - l] l5[n] + a[ii - \]

10.44*

Let x[n- be a JiJicrete-time signal with ^-transform Xiz). For each of ihe fulluwing signals, determine the ^-transform in lentiK of Xiz):
(a) A.Tc[n], where A is the first-difference operator defined by

Ax[n] = x{n] - x[n - \]

(b) Xi{n\ = \ fOp^ \

-- (c) JCi [n]

^[2n]

ti even ¨ odd

10.45.

Etetennine which of the following ^-transforms could be the transfer function of a discrete-time linear system that is not necessarily stable, but for which the unit
sample response is zero for n < Q. State yum reasons clearly,

(a) \1-^'.^--^

('b'> ^^ ''
Z-l;

A 1U.46. sequence x\t\\ is the output of an LTI system whose input is s\n]. The system is
described by the difference equation

x[n\ = s[n] - t'M'u".^/!- 8],

< where

< iv

1

(a) FinJ the system function

//,(;) - X{z)
S{z)'

and plc}t its poles and zeros in the z-plane. Indicate the region of convergence,

We (b)

wish to reoaver v[n] from x[n\ with an LTI syatem. Find the system tiinc-

tion

Chap 10 Prflbleme

so^

such Thar v|rt, = i[n]. Find all possible regions ofccinvei^ence for M^iz), and
ftir each, tell whether or not the system is causal or stable, (c) Find all possible choices for the unit impulse response h2\n\ such that

y[n] = h2[r]* x[fi] = s{n\.

10,47. The tollowing is known about a dis^rere-limo LTl sytlem with input 4^J and out-

put \[n]:

L - [tx\fi]

ir (

for all fl, then >jn] = for all n

2. Ux[n\ - (l/2^^Hfn] for ill n, then y[fi\ fw all n is of Ehe form

yin\ = &\n] + J^^] i.[¨J,

where tj is a tionsLant. la) Detertnine the value of the constant a. (b) Delemijne the response v[/i] if the input A^lrt] is
x[n] " \, for all n.
10.4S, Suppose a second-order causal LTl system has been designed with a teal impulse
lesponse ft] [rt] and a rational system function H\ (z). The pole-zero plot for Hdz) is shown in Figure P]0.48(a). Nov-- consider another causal second-order sy^stem
with impulse response /i^fn] and rational system funcLi^>n Hjiz) The polc-zero plot for H2{Z) is shown in Figure ?[OAH(bl Determine a sequence ^[n] such that the
tollowing three conditions hold:
(1) /i2[nl -^[n]^,[¨]
(2) g[fj\ = Oforn <
(3) ^k[k]\ = 3

1 tH^
(b)
Figure PI 0.48

.

8fO

Thez-Transtorm

Chap. 10

10.4*,

In Property 4ot Scttion iO.2, it was i^laied that if Jr[/i] ]sarigh;-sided sequence and

= ^ if the circle l^f

r^ isin the ROC, then all finite valucf> of ^ for which |j:| rnwUl

A also be in the ROC, Tn this dlscusBion an intuitive explanation was given. more

formal aj^ument paralleli* closely that used for Property 4 of Section 9.2, relating

to the T^aplace transform. Specifically, consider a right-side*i sequence

x[n\ = 0, tj< N^,

and for which

V X^ I4"]K" =

\x\n\\r;," <^.

Then if ro ^ r\

V |4rtl|r," - A ^Mn]|;--',

ft=A-'

N - :i

IP1049-I)

v^here A is a positive cotistant.
(a) Show that eq (P10.49-i;j is true, and determine the constant -4 in terms of rtj. n , and ^1
(b) FTi>m your result in part (a)> show thai Property 4 nf Section 10.2 follows. (c) Develop an argument similar to the foregoing one to demonstrate the validity
of Property 5 of Section 10,2.

10.50.

A discrete-time system with the pole-zero pattern shown in Figure P10.50ia) is
referred to as a first-order all-pass system, since the magnitude of the frequency response is constant regardless of frequency,

(*) Demonstrate algebraically that \HU^'^)\ i^i constant.

To demonstrate the same property geometricslly, consider the vector dia

We firam in Figure P10.50(b>.

wish to show that the length of vn is proportional

to the length of vi independently of the frequency to.

Unit Circle

Figure PI Oh 50a

Chap. 10 Problems
im

811

Figure PTD.SOb

Uw (b] Express the length of v^ using the

oFcosiives a^d the fjict ihat vj is t>ne leg

t>f a triangle for which the other two legs are the unit vector and a vector of

length a.

(c^ In a manner similar to that in pan (b), determine the length of v^ arvd show

that it is proportional in length to V| mdepetiiientl> of <<}.

10^1- Consider a real-valued sequence J(\_n] with rational ^-transform X{z)r
<a} From the definidon of the ^-transform, show that

X{z) = X*(z'\

(b) From yourresult inpart (aXshowthat if apole{zen>J of X(r)occiirsat :: ^ zq, thfcn a pyle (i&ro) must also occur at ^ = ^J,
(cj Verify the rei^ult in pajt (b) for each of the followirig sequences:

(2> x[n] - S[n] - k&in 1] + l&l'^ 2\
w (d> By CO mbin i ng yuur results Id part {b ) with the resu It of Problem 1 tK4 3( b >, sho
= that fora real, even sequence, iflhere is a pole (zero) of //(È) at:: p*"^*^, then there is also a pole (zero) of //(^) at z = Ofp)e^^ and at ^ ^ (\/p)e~^^.
10.52. Consider a Kcquence x\[n\ with ^-transform X^ii) and a sequence x-^\n] wuh ::-
transforn) X2{~X where

Shdw that Xiiz) = X]{,IU), and from this, show that if X](z) has a pole tni" zero) at ^ = Zif, then X2(z) ha^ a pole (or zero) at ; = 1/^.
1D,53. (a) CajTV out the proof for each of the following properties in Table 10.1. (1) Property set forth in Section 10.5.2 (2) Property set forth in Section 10.5.3 (3) Property set forth in Section 10.5.4

812

The z- Transform

Chap. 10

ROC (b) With A(^)<lejitUiTig the ^-transfonn of x[¨l and fir the

of X(:), determine,

ROC in lerms of X(7) and R^, the 7-transtorm and associated

for each of the

following sequences:
(1) x^n] (2) jrjjjffrtl, where zq is a complex number

10.54. In Section 10.5.9, ^v^ stated and proved the ii^itial- value theorem fnr causal se-

quences.
(a) State and prove the corri^sponding tbeorem if^l^J is ancicausal (i.e.. if ^Llrt] =

< (b) Show that if x\n\ = 0, w 0, then

x\\\ ^ lim^(X(^) -x\{i]).
^
z

< 10.55. Let x\n] denote a causal sequence <i.e , if x[n\ = 0, n 0^ for which x{0\ is

nonzero and finite.

(a) Using the initial -value rheorem, show that iherc are no pt^Ies or zeros of X{-'}

= at ^

-sc.

(b) Show that, as a consequence of >oiir result ir part (a>, the number of poles

L>f Kit) in the finite z-plane equals the number of zeros &f X{z) in the finite
^-plane. (The finite z-plane excludes ; = k.)

10,5fi* In Section 10.5,7, we stated the convolution property for the z-transform. Tt> show that this propctty holds, we begiti with the corivolution sum expressed as

X
x^Ui] = Xi[r{\*X2[n] - 2] X\[k]x2[n - kl

(Pm.56-n

(a) By taking the z-tratisform of eq. (PlO.56-1) and using eq (10.3), show that

-- where X'j(7) is the transform of X2[ri k].
<b) Using your result in part (a) and property 10,5,2 in Table 10, \ , show that

T X,{z} =X2iz)

xdk]z-^.

(c) From part (b), show th^

as stated in eq. (lO.Bl).
10,57, Let

Define

X2(t) = ^7[0]^X2[\]Z~* +

+ ^2[-V2]^-^-.

Yii) = Xt(r)X2(a

Chap 10 Problems

and let

M

X Y(z) -

-t
y^^^^-

= k (i

M (a} Express \v terms of A^i and A^j,
(b) Use polynomial muUipiication to determine yfOl, yflj.and y[2\.
^ (c) Use polynomial multipiication to show that, for -^ k M,

ST3

A 10.58. tniniitium phase system is a system thai is causal and SX^ie and for which the
inverse system i=i also causal and stable. Determine the necessary ccnstraints on the
location in the ^-plane of tKe poles and zeros of the system function of a minimum-
phase system.
10.59. Consider the digital filter .structure shown in Figure P10.59.

Jt[nl

G>

^ *-(+)

V[n]

-* 4

4

Ffgure PI 0.59

(a) Find H{-) for this causal filter. Plot the po]e-zero pattens and tndicaie the region of convergence.
(b> For what values of the jt is the system stable .*
= (c) Determme y[n] if t = 1 and 4^1 J C2/3r for allrt.
10.60, Considei a signal x[n] whose unilateral 7-tTaiisform is X{z). Show that the unilateral ^-transform of y[n] = x[n + ]] may be specified as

yU) = zTiz) - zx[Ol

10.61, If X(s>denotes the utiilateraJ ^-hansform of j:[fr], determine, in terms of 3C(^X the unilateral ^-transform of:

(a) xl/t-h31

(b) j;[/i-3J

Xl (c)

= -.^\.k\

EXTENSION PROBLEMS
10.62, The autocorrelation sequence t>f a sequence x[n] is defined as

Determine die ^-transform of c^^ , [ n] in terms of the z-tiansfomi o( x[n]

8M

The z-Tra/isform

Chap. 10

l(Lti3. By using the power-series expansion

< ^^ log(l - w) ^ --

-r, \w\

1,

determine the inverse of each of the following two ^-transforms:
U) Xiz) = }ogi}-2zl \z\<{

(b) Xiz) -logd- ^z"^), \i\> {
10.64. By first differentiating Y(^) and using the appropriate^ roperties of the j-transfonn,

determine the sequence for which the ^-transform is each of the following:

< (a) X(z) - logCl - 2z\ \z\

{

(b) Xiz) = loga- Iz'^X > 1^1 i

Compare your results for (a) ^id (b) with the results obtained in Problem 10.63, in

which the ptjwer-series expansion was usedr

10.65. The bilinear transformation is a mapping for obtaining a rational ^-transform H^iz) from a rational Laplace transform H^is). This mapping has two importiint proper-

ties:
1, If H^{s) is the Lapl^e tranaftjrm of a causal and stable LTl system, then f/j(;) is the z-transfomi of a causal and .stable LTF system.
2. Certain important characteristics oi\H^ijai)\ are preserved in \H4\e^^)\.
In this problem, we illustrate the second of these properties for the case of all-pass

filters,

(a) Let

a s -\-

where a is real and positive. Show that

\H,Ui^)\ = 1.

(b> Let us now apply the bilinear transformation to HAx) in order to obtain Hj{z).
That is.

H,tU) = ^As)\,

77^ I

L

'

Show that Hfiiz] has one pole (which is inside the uvtit circle) and ont zero
(which is outside the unit cirole).
(c> For the system function Hjiz) derived in part (c), show thac |//j(f '''')| = 1.
lO.M. The bilinear transformation, introduced in the previous problem, may also be used to obtain a discrete-time filter, the magnitude of whose frequency response is sim-
ilar to the magnitude of the frequency response of a given continuous-time low-
pass filter. In thifj problem, we illustrate the similarity through ihe example of a
continuous- liine setond-order Butterworth filter with system function //t (s).

Chap 10 ProtJtems (a> Let
Show that
(b) Given that

JV^(fn = //c|jtan^|,

SI 5

andthatthecorrespondingfilteriscausal, verify that WctO) = ],that |f/r(j<")[

decrease^monQtanically with increasing positive values Dr¨c>. that Hc(J)\'^ =

^ \n. (i.e,, that ui^

1 is the half-power ftcqucncji)* and thai Ht(£> ^ 0.

{c) Sho^v that if the hilinear tiansformation is applied to Hfi^) of part (b) in i>rder
to obtain fifiiz}^ then the following may be ass¨rt¨i about Hdiz) and Rdif^'^Y
1' ^diX} has only two poles, both of which are inside the unit circle,
1, HA^^) = 1 w 3£ ]/f^(e^^)| decreases tiwnotonicaliy as goes from to -tt.

4. The half-power frequency GtH^ie^*^) is 7r/2.

11
Linear feedback systems

1 T.O INTRODUCTION

816

-- IL has long been recognized Chat in many situations there arc particular advantages to be
gaitied by using feedbacic that is, by using the output of a system to control or modify
the input. For example, it is common in electroinechanical systems, such as a motor whose
shaft position is to be maintained ^t a constant angle, to measure the eirrot between the desired and the tme po^^itjon and to use this error in the form of a signal to tum the shaft
in the appropriate du^cdon. This is illustrated in Figure 11.1, where we have depicted the use of a dc motor for the accurate pointing of a telescope. In Figure 1 LlU) we have indicated pictorially what such a system would look like, where v{t) is the input voltage to the motor and d{t) is the atigulax position of the telescope platform. The block diagram
for the motor-driven pointing system is shown in Figure II 1(b). A feedback system for
controlling the position of the telescope is illustrated in Figure 1 1 .1(c), and a block diagram equivalent to this system is shown in Figure 1 1 .1(d). The eitemal, or reference, input to
A this feedback system is the desired shaft angle Or,. potentiometer is used to convert the
angle inro a voltage K[ 6^ proportional to ifn. Similarly, a second potentiometer produces a voltage K] e(/) proportional to the actual platform angle. These two voltages are compared, producing an error voltage K] |S/3 -- &{f)], which is amplified and then used to drive the
electric motor
Figure 11.1 suggests two different methods for pointing the telescope . One of these is the feedbiick sysLem of Figures 11.1(c) and (d). Here£ the input that we must prcjvide
is the desired reference angle 6j). Alternatively, if the initial angle, the desired angle, and
the detailed electrical and mechanical characteristics of the motor-shaft assemblj were
known exactly, we could specify the precise history of the input voltage v{i) that would
first accelerate and then decelerate the shaft, bringing the platform to a stop at the desired

vm

fa I

c . ::> H(t)

v(t)

tnpul voltage

Molor '

*- m)

Platfoim

angular

positjon

-- Jd

'*rV7r^ ~ *k K

Motor

*-e(n

i^}

Figure ITT Use Of feedback to control the angular position of a telescope, (a) dc

motor-d riven teie^cope pJatform^ (t>) iJock diagraFn of the system in (a); (c) fsedback

K system for pointing tfie telescope; (d) block diagram of the system in ic) {here,

=

ai7

1

81 e

Linear Feedback Systems

Chap. 1

A jM^Mtion Wr'ithi^uV the use of fetdb^c^t, as in Figures 1 [ . Ka> and (t>). system opeiating in
accordaiit;e with Figures 11. Ua) and (b) is typically referred to as an open-loop xysiem, in contrast to th^ ctosed-loop system of Figur^i 11.1(c) and (dt. In s practical environment, there are clear advantages to controlling the motor-shaft angle with the closed-loop system rather than with the open-loop systeoL For example, in the closed-loop system, when the shaft has been rotated *o the correct poiition, any disturbance from this position will be sensed, and the resulting eiror will be used to provide a correction. In the open-
loop system, there is no mechanism for providing a correction. As anoTher advantage nf
the ch]sed-loop system, consider th^ effect of errors in modeling the characteristics of the motor-shaft assembly. In the open -loop system, a precis* charactenzaUon ot the system is
required to design the correct input. In the closed-loop system, the input is simpl^' the de-
sired shaft angle and does not require precise knowledge of the systeitt. This inscnsilivity of the closed-loop system to disturbance!; and to imprecise knowledge of the system are two inaportant advantages of feedback.
The control ^)f an electric mot[>risjust one of agreat many examples in whith feed-
back plays an itnportatit role. Similar uses of feedback can be found in a wide variety ^)f applications, such as chemical process control, automotive fuel systems, household heating systems, and aerospace systems, to natne just a fev^. In addition, feedback is also present
in many biological processes and in the control of human motion. For example, when a
person reaches for an object, it is usual during the reaching process to monitor visually the distance between the hand and the object so that the velocity of the haad can be smoothly
decreased as the distance (i.e., the error) between the hand and the object decreases. The effcctivftT^ess of using the system output (hand posuion) t<i contTi>l ibe input is clearly demonstrated by alternatively reaching with and without the use of visual feedback.
Jn addition to its use in providing anerTor-correcting mechanism that can reduce sen-
m sitivity lu disturbances and to errors in the modeling of the system that i^ be controlled,
another imponant charactenstie of feedback is its potential for stabilizing a system that is
m inherently unit^ble. Consider the problem of trying to balance a broomstick the palm
(]f the hand. If the hand is held stationary, small disturbances (such a^ a slight breeze or
inadvertent motion of the hand) will cause the broom to fall over Of course, if one knows
exactly whar disturbances will occur, and if one can contn>l the motion of the hand per-
fectly, it is possible to determine in advance how to move the hand to balatice the broom. This is clearly unrealistic; however, by always moving the hard in the direction in which the broom is fallings the broom can be balanced. This, of course^ requires feedback Ji
A order to f>ense the direction in which the brwim is faUing. second example that is closely
related to the balancing of a broom is the problem of contrail ling aso-callcd mvcrted pendulum, which is illustrated in Figure 1 1.2. As shown, an inverted pendulum consists of a thin rod with a wi^ight at the top. The bettom of the rod is mounted on a cart that can move
in either direction along atrack. Again, if the cart is kept stationary, the inverted pendiiluTn

Figure M.2 An inverted pendu turn

Sec. 11. 1

Linear Feedback Systerrts

8T9

will topple over. The problem of stabilizing the pendulum is one of designing -a feedback iysiem th^l will move ihe cart U^ keep the pendulum vertical This example is examined
A in Problem 1 1.5G. third example, which again bears some similarity to the balancing of
a bnHJTTi, is the problem of controlling the trajectory of a rocket. In this case, much as the movement of the hand is used to compensate for <iif>turbiioces in the position of the broom,
the direction of the thrust of the rocket is used to correct for changes in aerodynamic forces and wind disturbances that would otherwise caus& the rocket to deviate from its course. Again, feedback in. imponant, bei:ause these forces and disturbances are never precisely knoivn in advance.
The preceding examples provide some indication of why feedback may be useful. In the next two sections we introduce the basic: block diagrams atxl equations for linear
feedback systems and discuss in more detail a number of applications of feedbatik and
control, both in continuous time and in discrete time. We also point out how feedback can
have harmful as well as useful effects. These examples of the uses and effects of feedback
will give us some insight into how changes in the parameters in a feedback control system
lead to changes in the behavior of the syste m. Understanding this rel ation shi p i s es sen li a.1 ni designing feedback systems that have certain desirable characteristics. With this material
as background, we will then develop, in the remaining sections of the chapter, several
specific techniques that are of sjgniticant value in the analysis and design of cantinuoustime and discrete- time feedback systeins.

11.1 UNEAf? I^EEDBACK SYSTEMS

Ihe general contiguration of a contimjous-time LTI feedback sysiem is s.hown in E-igure 1 1.3(a) andthatofadiscreie-time LTI feedback system in Figure i 13(b). Bet:au^ of

K(t)

O e(t)

H^s)

V<1^

. r(t)

G(s)

[a)

H(z)

^Vlf^l

Inl G(zj
(b}

Figure T T .3 Basi[; feedback avstem
(x>nfiguratiGns in (a) continuous time and (b)ctlscrete time.

11

820

Linear Feedback Systems

Chap. 1

the typkiil applications in which feedback is utilizedj it is natural to restrict the systems in

ttiese figures to be causal. This will be our assumption throughout the chapter. Jn that case,
m the system funciiotts Figure 11.3 can be inieipreted either as unilaierLi] or as bilateral

trarsforms, and, as a consequence of causality, the ROC's associated with them wUl always

be to the right of the rightmost pole for Laplace transforms and outside the outermost pole

for ?-tran.sform5.
It should also bt noted that the convention u^ed in Figure U3(a) h that fii\ the

signal fed back, is subtracted from the input x{t) to form e(i). The identical convention

is adopted in discrete linrie. Historically, this convention arose in tracking -systeni applica-
tifins, where xiO represented a desired command and È(0 represented the error t>etween che command and the actual resp<inse rit). This was the case, for example, in our discus-
sion of the pointing of a telescope. In more geiierdl feedback systems, f=<f; and e[nl the

discrete-time counterpart fif ^(r), rnay not cotrcspond to or be directly interprelable as ernir

signals.

HU) m The systeni function.

in Figure 1 1 .3(a) ^^t Hij) Figure 1 1 3(b) is referred to

as the j^iisfem function lyj the forward path and G(i) or G{z) as the sy.^tem funcnon offhe

feedback path. The system function of the overall system of Figure 11.3(a) or (b) ts referred

to as the tlosed-loop systemfunction and will be denoted by Qis) or Q{z)^ In SecLions 9.8.
antl 10.8 ], we derived expressions for the systeni functions of feedback interconnections

of LTl systems. Applying these results to the feedback systems of Figure 1 1 .3, we obtain

H U Equations ( . 1) and 1 2) represent the fundamental equations for the study of LTI feed-
bacl; systems. 1ti the following section^^ we use these equations as the basis for gaining
insight into the properties of feedback systems and for developing several tools for their
analysis.

1 K2 SOME APPUCATIONS AND CONSEQUENCES OF FEEDBACK

In the introduction, we provided a brief, intuitive look at some of the properties and u^es

of feedback sy.stems. In this section, we examine a number of the characteristics and ap^

plications of feedback in somewhat more quantitative terms^ using the basic feedback

equations (11,1) and (1 1 .2) as a starting point. Our purpose is to provide an introduction

to and an appreciation fcsrthe applications of feedback, rather than to develop an^ of these

applications in detail. Jn the sections that follow, we focus in more depth on =ieverat specific

techniques for analyzing feedback systems that ai^ useful in a wide range of problems,

we includifig many of the applications that

are about t<i describe.

I K2. 1 Inverse System Design
In some applications, one would like to synthesize the inverse of a given continuous- time system. Suppose diat this system has system function ?(j), and consider the feedback
system showninFigure U.4.Applyingequation(lI.l)with//Cs) = A: and GU) ^ Pi^U

Sec. 1 1 .2

Some Applications and Cansequences of Feedtnack

S21

x(tj

r* (V^^

K

y<t)

b

P{5^

Figure 1 1 .4 Form ot a feedback sySem used in ^mpiementng the inverse of tfie svstem wrth system func-
tion P{S).

we find that the closed-loop system function is

0(0

=

K

+ 1

A'P(.T)'

K If The gain is suffioLÈrnt]y large no that ^P{s} ^^ 1, then

in -3)

1
G(j)-
P(^>^

1 1 1 .4)

in which case the feedhack system approj:imates the inverse of the system with system function FU)-
K It Ls importanl to note that the restilt in eq. (1 1 ,4) requires that the gain be suffi-
ciently high, but is otherwise not dependent on the pretise value of the gain. Operational ampUiicrs are one class of devices that provide this kind of gain and arc widely used in
feedback systems. One common application of the inversion inherent in eq (11 4> is in the implementation of integrators. A capacitor has the property that its current is proportional to the derivative of the voltage By inserting a capacitor in the feedback path around an
operational amphfier, the differetiriaiion property of the capacitor is inverted u> pn>vide
integration. This specific apphcation is explored in more detail in Problems 11.50-1 1.52.
Allhough our discussion is for the most part restricted to linear systems, it is wonh
pointing out that thi^ ^ame basic approach is coimnonly used in inverting ? nonlineaiily. Ftjr example, systems for which the output is the logarithm of the input are commonly implemented by utilizing the exponential current-voltage charactcrisiics tjf a diode as feedback around an operational amplifier. This is explored in more detail in Problem 1 1 53.

T T .Z.2 Compensation for Nonideal Elements
Another common use of feedbiitk is to correct tor some of the nonideal properties of the
open-loop system. For example, feedback is often used in the design of amplifiers to provide constant-gain amplification in a given frequency band, and in fact, lE is this application, pioneered by H. S. Black at Bell Telephone Laboratories in the 1930s, that is generally considered to have been the catalyst tor the development of feedback control a^ a practical and useful system design methodology.
Specifically, consider an open-bop frequency respimse HiJM) v^hich prov ides amplificatiim over the specified frequency band, but which is not constats over that range. For example, operational amplifiers or the vacuum tube amplifiers of concern to Black and
his c{)lleagues typically provide considerable, but not precisely controUed, amplificatu^n

822

Unear^ Feedback Sysiems

Chap 11

While such devices can provide raw amplification levels of several ordciK c>f magnitude, the price one pays for this includes uncenain levels of ampl]hcadf>[i that can fluctuate ss'ilh frequenoyn lime, temperature, etc., and that can also introduce unwanted phase and tionlineardisti^rtions What BJack prvposeil was placing.*iU*;h a powerful* buttinceTtain and erratic, amplifier in a feedback loop as in Figure 1 1.3(a) with G(s) chosen to be constant,
i.e., 0(s) == Kr In this case, the clo.sed-Ioop frequency response is

if, over the specified frequency range,

£ \Kmji^)\

\,

then

(11,6)

Q{joy)=- /7
li

(n.7)

That is, the closed- Unjp frequency response is constant, as desired. This Df course assumes

that the system in the feedback path can be desired so that its frequency response Gijvj)

has a constant gain K over the desired frequency band, which is precisely what we assumed

we could rtof ensure forH(;*ri), The difference between the requirement on H{jm) and that

H on Gijifi)^ however, is that Mijn}) must provide amplification, whereas, from eq. 1 .7).
K we see that for the overall closed-loop system to provide a gain greater than unity, must

GU^) be less than 1 . That is,

must be an attenuator over the specified range of frequencies.

In general, an attenuator with approximately fiat frequency characteristics is considerably

easier to realize than an amplifier with approximately flat frequency response (since an

attenuator can be constructed from passive elements).

The use of feedback to flatten the frequency response incurs some cost, however,

and it is this fact that led to the considerable skepticism with which Black's idea was met.

In particular, from eqs. (11.6) and (117), we iiee that

^ i-eO)- \H(,jto)\

(11,8)

so that the closed-loop gain \/K will be substantialiy less than the open -loop gain |H(/w)|.
This apparently significant loss of gain, attributable to what Black referred to as di^^cneraiive or negative feedback, was initially viewed as a serious weakness in his negative-
feedback amplifier. Indeed, the effect had been known for many years and bad led to the conviction that negative feedback was not a particularly useful mechanism. Ho\\ever,
Blauk pointed out that what one gave up in overall gain was often more than offset by the reduced sensitivity of the overall closed-loop amplitier: The closed-loop system function
H w is essentiiiily equal to eq . ( 11 .7), independently of variations in I jtit >, as long a s | // ( ; )
|
IS large enough. Thus, if the open-loop amplifier is inilially dei^igned wjth considerably more gain than is actually needed, the closed-loop amphiier will provide the desired lev-
els of amplification with greatly reduced sensitivity. This concept and iLs application to extending the bandwidth of an amplifier are explored in Probletn 1 1.49.

1

Sec. 1 .2

Some Applications and Consequents of Feedback

SJ3

1 T.2.3 Stabitizaripn of Un^tatPfe S/stems
As nienuoned in the introdutitifln, one use of feedback .%ystems is to stabilize systems tha:, without fewibackT are unstable. Examples of this land of application include the controi of the trajectory ;^f a roLket, the regulation of nu;:lear reactions in a nuclear power plant, the stabilization of ati aircrafl, and the t^atural and regulatory control of animal populatJotis.
ToiUustrate how feedback can be used to sitabih^c an unstable system > let us consider
a simple first-order continuous -time system with

_^. >/<j) ^ s ^ a

,11.9)

> With a 0, the system is unstable. Gioosing the systeiti function Gis) to be a constant
gain A", we see that the closed-loop systejii function in eq. (1 1.1) becoines

1 + KH{s) b
X- (i+ Kh'

(IIJO)

The closed-^oop system w^ll be stable if the pole is moved into the left half of ihe v-planc.
This will be the case if

b
Thus, we can stabilize the system with a constant gain in the feedback loop if that gain is
chosen to satisfy eq. ( 1 1 . 1 1 ). This type of feedback system is referred to as a proportionfil feedback .^y.^r^Frtn since the signal that is fed back i? propojiional to the output oi the system.
As another example^ consider the second-order systetn

HU) = ^^-.

(J 1,12)

> Ifii 0, the systeTTi is an oscillator (i.e., //(jj his its poles on the yw-axis), and the impulse < response of the system is sinusoidal, ff i] 0. H(s) has one poie it^ the left-half plane
aiul ^ine in the right-half plaiie. Thus, in eiiber case, tiie system i& unstable, [n fact, as considered in Problem 1 1 .56, the system function given in eq. ( 11,12) with a <() can be used to model the dynamic? of the inverted pendulum described in the introduction.
Let us first consl<ler the use of proportiwna] feedback for this second-order system;
that is, we take

GO) ^ K.

,(11.13)

we Subitituting int(j e-^, (1 1 .1 ),

obtain

824

Lliwar Feedback Systems

Chap, it

In our discussion of second-order sy&t&ms in Chapter 6> we oansidered a transfer function
of the fomi
""
(11.15)

For such a system to be stable, Wn must be real and positive (i.e., cjI > 0). and ^ must
be positive (corresponding to positive damping). Fromeqs. (J 1.14) and (1115), it follows
thaL with proportional feedback we can only influence the value of Wn> and consequently, we cannot st^illze the system becanse we cannot introduce any damping. To suggest a
type of feedback that can be used to stabilize this system^ recall the mass-spring-da^hpot mechanical system described in our examination of second-order systems in Section 6.5.2.
We saw that damping in tiiat system was the result of the irclusion of a dashpot, which
provided a restoring fofce proportional to the velocity of the mass. This suggest that we
cottsid^r proportionai-plua-deriva/ive feedback, ihat is, a G{s} of the fcirm

C(i) = K\ +K2S,

(IL16)

which yields

Q{s} - ---

* 7

:.

(U J7)

The closed -loop poles will be in the left-halt plane, and hence, the closed-loop %ysicm will
be stable as long as we choose ^1 and K2 to guarantee thai

bK2 >0, a +Kih>Q.

(11. IS)

The preceding discussion Dlustrates how feedback can be uied to stabilize continuous-time systems. The stabilization of unstable systems is an importain application uf feedback for discrete-time systems as well. B\amples of discrete-time systems that are
unstable in the absence of feedback a/e models of population growth. To illustrate hc}w feedback can prevent the unimpeded growth of populations, let us consider a simple model for the evolution of the population of asingle species of iinimal Let v[/il denote the number of animals in ihe nth generation, and assume that without the presence of any impeding influences, the birthrate is such that the population would double each generation. In this case, the basic equation for the population dynamics of the species is

\[n] - 2yfn- 1] + e\nl

{U A9)

where e[n] represents an> additions to ordeleiions from the population that aie caused by
external influences.
Tliis population nnodel is obviously unstable, with an impulse response that ^rows exponentially However, in any ecological system, there are a number of factors that will inhibit the growth of a population. For example, limits on the food suppK for the species
will manifest themselves through a reduction in population gniwdi when thc'number of animals becomes large. Similarly, if the species has natural enemies, it is often reasonable to assume that the population of the predators will grow when the ptiputation of the prey
increases and, ctmsequenlly, thai the presence of natural enemies will retard population
growth. In addition to natural influences such as these, there may be effet is intn>duced b>

1

Sec. 11.2

SoiTeAppl-catiQn$Ancf Consequences of Feedback

S2S

hunians that arc aimed at population control. For example, th*i food supply or the predator

Mes population may fall under human regulation In addition, stockitig

with fish or im-

porting animiils from otherareas can be used to promote growth, and the control of hunting

or fiihing can al&o provide a regulative effect. Because all of Lhese influences depend on

the si/e of the pjpulaiion (either naturally or by design), they represent feedback effeeis.

Based tm the preceding discussion, we can separate ^[rtl into two pans t>y means of

the equation

e[n] = i[n] - t\nl

< 1 [ 20>

where r[tt\ represents the effect of the regulative influences described in die prevLous paragraph and x[n] incorporates any oUier external effects, such as the migr^ion of animals
or natural disasters or disease. Note that we have included a minus sign in eq. (11 ZO),
This is consistent with our convention of using negative feedback, and here it also has the physical interpretal:ion that, since the unitihihited growth of the population is unstable, the
feedback lerm plays the role of a rcictrdinf^ influence. To see how the population can be
controlled by the presence of this feedback term, suppose that the regulative influencesaccount for the depletion of a fixed proportion ^ of the population in each generation. Since,
m according to our model, the surviving fraction of each generation will double size, it
follows that

y\n] = 2(1 - ^)y[n - I] + x[n]. Comparing eq, (11,21) widi eqs. (11 ,19) and(l].20>, we see that

01.21)

r[n] = 2py\n- If

(11,22)

The factor of 2 here represents die fact that the depletion of the present population decreases ihe number of births in the next generation
This example of the use of feedback is illustrated in Figure 1 1.5. Here, the system function of the forward path is obtained from eq, (11,19) as

mz) =

1

(1123)

while from eq, (11. 22) die system function of the feedback path is
Giz) = 2^z '.

(1124)

nl

y

f

^
J

1

-

,

1

ylnj

2 py[n-1]

2^7"'

Figure 1 .% Block tjiagrarn of a simple feedback model ot population
dynamics.

1

626
Consequently, the closed-loop system function i^

Linear Feebback Systems

Chap. 1

< <^ < Ifjff

1/2. the closed-loop system is still unstable, wheteas 11 IS stable^ if 1/2

3/2.

Clearly^ this example of population growth and control is extremely simplified. For

instance, the feedback mod^l of eq, < 1 1,22) does not accouni for the fact that the pan of r[n] which is due to the presence of natural enemies depends upon the pi>pijlation of the
predators, which in turn has its own growth dynamics. Such effects can be incorporated
by maiing the feedback model more complex to reflect the presence of other dynamics

in an ecological system, and the resulting models for the evolution of interacting spscies

are extremely Imponani in ecological studies. However, even without the incorpi>ratit>n
of these effects, the simple model that we have described here docs illustrate the basic ideas of how feedback: can preveni both the unlbnited proliferation of a species and its extinction. In particular, we can see at an elementary level how human-induced factors
can be used. For example, if a natural disaster or an increase in the population of natural enemies causes a drastic decrease in the population of a species, a tightening of limits on hunting or fishing and accelerated efforts to increase the population can be used to

decrease ^ in order to destabilize the system to alkiw for rapid growth, until a nnnnal-size

population is again attained.

Note also that for this type of problem, it is not usually the case that one wants

^ strict stability. If the regulating influences are such that =^1/2, and if all other external influences are zero {i.e.. if x[n\ = 0),then y[n] = - y[fi 1]. Therefore, as long as .t|n] is
small and averages to zero over several generations, a value of ^ = 1/2 will result in an
essentially constant population. However, for this value of ^ the system is unstable, since
eq. ( 1 1 .2 1 ) then reduces to

+ = - v[h]

ytfl

11 j:[n].

{1126)

That is. the system is equivalent to an accumulator. Thus, if j[[n] is a unit step, the output grows without bound. Consequently, if a steady trend is expected in x[nl caused, for
> example, by a migration of animals into a region, a value of ^ 1/2 would need to be
used to stabilize the system and thus lo keep the population within bounds and maintain
an ecological balance.

1 1.2.4 Sampfed-Ddta Feedback Syitems
In addition to dealing with problems such as the one justdescnbed, discrete-time feedback techniques are of great importance in a wide variety of applicadons involving continuous
time systems. The flexibility of digital systems has made the implementation o^sampted-
data feedback systemji an extremely attractive {iption. In such a system, the output of a continuous-time system is sampled, some processing is done on the resulting sequence
of samples, and a discrete sequence of feedback commands is generated. This sequence

p ' Alttiou^, in die context i>f wur popuIatioTi example, uuuld never excee<] unity, vince ^ --- i cwrrt-
sponds to Temoving more than iOO% f>f the populutiun

^
'

Sec. 11.2

Some Applications and Consequences ot Feedback

&21

is then convened to a concinuous-time signaJ that is fe<l back ro and subtrat^ted from the
exteiral input to produce the actual input to the ootitiiiuou?j-time system.
Clearly, the constraint of causality on feedback systems inrrposes a restriction on the
prot:ess of converting the discrete-time feedback signal to a continuoui-time signal (e,g,,
ideal Ivjwpass liltering ^ir any noncausal approximation of it is not allowed). One of the
m most widely used conversion =tyHteTns is the zero-order hoid (introduced SecLion 7 1 .2).
The structure of a sampled-data feedback system involving a zero-order hold is depicted in Figure 1 1 .6(a), In the figure, we have a continuous-time LTJ system with Kystem function H{sy that is .samplod to pnxiuce a discrete-time sequence

p[¨] = y\nT\

(11.27)

The stfquence p\n\ is then processed by a di>crete-time LTI system with system funt:tion Giz), and the resulting output is put through a zero-order hold tti produce the
continuous-time signal

Z{t) = d[n]

for hT ^ t<(n+ {)T

(il.28)

Thjs ^i^^l is subtracted from the extemaJ input x{i) to produce e{i).

9[t)
? ^i Alt>^
=[t)
Zero-order

H(S}

*- yU)
'
Ideal C/D

JL
d[n]

3(z)

P[nl

-- ,

(aj
.
F{^>

--,

--

r[ni

i'CD-?[nj

Zero-ordef

hale

H(s)

Ideal C/D

-->

-P(n]

-

__J

^
G{z)

K6 FJgure 1

(a) A sampled-data feedbatk system Lining a jero-order hold;

(b) e<|L(ivalem discrete-time system.

--

S2B

Linear Feedback Sy&terns

Chap. 11

Suppose aho ihat x{t) is constant over intsTvals of length 7. That is,

j(0 = r\n^

for tiT ^ r<(n+ 1)7,

H 1 .2^)

m where r[n] ii a disitrele-titne sequence. This is an approximation that is usually valid
practice, as the sampling rate is lypitJally fast enough iio that jc(t} does not change appre ciahly tjver intervals (jf length T. Furthermore, in nciany applications, the exiemal input is i:self actually generated by applying a zero-order hultl operation to a discrete sequence. For example, in systems such as advanced aircraft, the external inputs represent humiui
cperator commands that arc themselves first processed digitally and then converted back
to continuous-time input signals. Because the 7Èro-i}rder hold is a linear cperarion, the
feedbiick systeru of Figure 1 L6(a) when xU) is given by eq. (11,29) is equivalent to the
jjystem of Figure lL6(b).
As shown in Problem II 60, the discrete-tiine system with input e{n\ and output p[n] is an LTl system with system function F(z) that is related to the continuous- lime system function ll{s) by means of a srep-invarintn transformation. Thai is. if .\{i) is the
step response of the continuous-tiine system^ then the step respot^sc i/[;i| of the discretettmc system consists of equally spaced samples of 5(0. Mathematically,

^[n] = iOiH

for all rt.

(11.^0)

Ont;e we have determined f(z)v we have ^ completely discrete- time feedback system
model (Figure ll.6(t>)) exactly capturing the behavior of the continuous -time feedback
system (Figtire ll.6<a)) at the samphng instants t = nT, luid we can then consider de-
^igning the feedback system function G(t) to achieve our desired objectives. An example
of designing such a. sampled-data feedback system to stabilize an unstable continuous-tirtie system is examined in detail in Problem 1 1.60,

1 1 .2.5 Tracking Systems
As mentioned in Section ll.O, one of the important applications of feedback is in the design of systems in which the objective is to have the output track or folbw the input.
There is a broad range of problems in which tracking is an important component. For example, the telescope-pointing problem discussed in Section 1 1.0 is a tracking problem:
The feedback system of Figures 11.1(c) and (d)has as its input the desu^ pointing angle,
and the purpose of the feedback lowp is to pr^ivide a mechanism for driving the telescope
to follow the inpuL In airplane autopilots the input is the desired flight path of the vehicle^ and the autopilot feedback system uses the aircraft control surfaces (rudder, ailerons, and elevator) and thrust control in order to keep the aircraft on the prescribed course.
To illustrate some of Lhe issues that arise in the design of tracking systems, consider the discrete-time feedback system depicted in Figure 1 1 7(a>. The eiaminati^m [>f discrete-time tracking systems of this form often arises in analyzing the characteristics of sampled-daia tracking systems for continuoLis-time applications. One example of such a system is a digital autopilot. In Figure 11.7(a), fif,{z) denotes the system function of the syj^tem whose tjutput is to he controHed^ This .system is often refen^d tcj a^* the plant, a leim that can be traced to applications such as the control of power plants, heating systems, and chemical-processing plants The system function Ht_{z) represents a compensator, which is the element to be designed. Here, the input to the compensator is the tracking error

)

Sec, 11,2

Some Applications and Consequences of Fe¨dbac4<

HJa)

y[nl

829

i^)

[n]

i^ eim

f

*" HelD

1^(1)

{b)

'
-(+)-ñ

dlr]

Figure 11.7 (a) Discrete-time
tracking system; (b) tracking system of (a) with a disturt>ance d[n] \n the feedb>kck path accountirg for ih^ presence trf measurement errors

thiit is, the difTcrencc e[n] between th& input x[n] and the outpui >[n]. The output of tiie compensaLor is tht input to the plant (for example, the actual voltage applied to the motor in the feedback syst&m of Figures 1 1 .1(c) and (d) or the act^al physical input to the drive
syMem of the rudder of an aircraft).
= To simplify notationJet //(s) /^^(^W;?^^). In thiscase.the application of eq {\\ 2)
yields the relationship

{\\.^\)

Also, since r(;) = //(^)E(z)> it follows thai

E(z) =

1
X(j).

1 + Hiz)

we = or, specializing to z

e-^*'*>

cbtain

(11.32)

1
Xie^^^l
1 ^ HieJ^)

(11-13)

Equation (H 33) provides us with some insight into the design of tracking systems. Specil-

we icallyT for good tracking performance,

would like e{n\ or, equivalenily, t'tf^^^l ro be

small. That is.

1
rM^^^i^O. 1 + Hief^

(li 34)

Consequently, for that range of frequencies for which X{e^*^) is nonzero, we would like \H{e^*^)\ to be laa^c. Thus, we have one of the fundamental pnncipies of [eedback system design: Good tracking performance requires a large gain. This desire for a Large gain, however, must typicilly be tempered, for several reasons. One reason is that if the gain
IS too large, the closed-loop system nnay have undesirabje characteristics i such dh ux>liule

fi3o

Unear Feedback S^tems

CF^ap. 11

damping) or might in fact become unstable. This possibility is discussed in the next section and IS also addressed by the methods developed in subsequent sections.
In addition to the issue of stability, there are other reaiiyns for wanting to limit the ^airi
in a tracking system. For example, in implementing such a system, we must measure the
OLtput v[¨] iT^ order to compare it to the commaijid input x[ti\, and any measuring device used will have inaccuracies and errijr sources (such as thermal noise in the electronics
of the device). Tn Figure 11. 7(b), we have included these error sources in the form of a
diiturbance input d[ti] in the feedback Imip, Sosnc siniple system fnnciion algebra yields the following relationship between K(j)and thetransfomis X{i) and D{zi of x[n] and^/fnj:

ru) =
LI + //(e)

'^^^^D(.)
[l+H{z)

(11.35)

From this expression, ive see that in order to Tninimize the influence oldln] on y[n], we would like ff{z) to be smaJl so that the second term on the right-hand side of eq. (11.35)
is small.
From the preceding developinent, we see that the goals of tracking a,nd of nuiiiiiiiz-
ing the effect tif Tneasurement errors are conflicring, and one must take this into act;ount in coming up with an acceptable system design. In generid, the design depends wn more detailed information concerning the characteristics of the input j^lnj and the disturbance d[n].
For example, in many applications x\a] has a slgnificHni amount of its energy concentrated
ai low frequencies, while measurement error sources such as thermal noise have a great deal of energy at high frequencies. Consequently, one usually designs the compensator
w H^(z) so that |tf(e''V^)| is large at low frequencies and is small for near Ý7r.
There are a variety of other issues that one must consider in designing tracking systems, such as the presence of disturbances at other points in the feedback loop. (For example, the effect of wind on the mtition of an aircraft must be taken into account in designing an aut(^pilot.> The methods of feedback system analysis mtroducedin this chapter provide the necessary tools For examining each of these issues. In Problem 11.57, we use sotne of these loflls to investigate several other aspects of the problem of designing u^acking
systems.

1 1.2.6 DestabUt2atJon Caused by Feedback
As well as having many applications, feedback can buve undesirable effeci.s and can in
fact cause instability. For example, consider the telescope- pointing system illustrated in
Figure 11.1. From the discussion in the preceding section, we know thnt it would be desirable to have a large amplifier gain in order to achieve good performance in tracking the
desired pointing angle. On the other hand, as we increase the gain, we are likeiy n> obtain
faster U^acking response at the expense of a reduction in system dampmg, resulting in sig-
nificant overshoot and ringing in response to changes in die desired angle. FLrdiermore, instabiUiy can result if the gain is increased too much.
Another cvimraon e)iample of the possible destabilizing effect of feedback is feedback in audio systems. Consider the situaLon depicted in Figure ll.S(a). Here, a loudspeaker produces an audio signal that js an amplified version tif the sounds picked up by a microphone. Note that in addition to other audio inputs, the sound coming from the speaker
itself may be sensed by the microphone. How strong diis particular signal i"; depends upon

1

1 Sec. 1

Some Apphoatlois and Consequences of Feadt^ck

Amplifier

Speaker

831

EKtarnaS audio * inputs

o

Total ajdio irput to the microphone
-I K.

K^e -sT
{b)

Speaker output

audio inputs

^^ ^-f^+J-

K^e hT
(c)

, ^ Speakaoutput

Figure 1 1.B (a) Pictorial repre-

sentation otthe piieiomenon of audio
*eedbaok; (b) Wock diagram represen-

tation of (a): fc) block diagram in (b)

redrawn as a negativa feedback system (/Vote: e~^^is the system funcliort

oi a r-second time delay.)

the distance Ixtween the speaker and the microphone. Spfe;ifically, because of the anenuating properties of air, the strength of the signaJ reaching the microphone from ihe speaker decreases as the distance between the speater and the microphone increases. In addition, due to the finite speed of propagatioti of sound waves, there is time delay between iht signal produced by the speaker and that sensed by the microphone.
ThiS audio feedback iyjitem is represented in block diagram I'orm in Figure 1 ] g(b).
Her^, the constant A 2 in the feedback path represents the attenuation, and T is the prop-
agation delay. The coni£tanÈ K\ is the amplifier ^ajn. Also, note that the output from the feedback path is added lo the external input. This is an example ^i po^iiihe fe^dba^k As
^ discussed tiie beginning of the section, die use of a negative sign in the definuion of
the basic teedbaek system of Figure 1 1.3 is purely conventional, and positive ^nd negiitivc feedback systems can be analyzed using the same tools. For exan^ple. as ilostrated ni Figure 1 1 .8(c), the feedback system of Rgure 1 1 .8(b) can be written as a ne^aaivf ac^bjLl.

832

Unear Feedback Systems

Chap. 11

system by adding a. vnirwis sign to the feedback-paih system function. From this figure and
from eq. ( 1 1 - 1 )> we can del&tmiite the closed-loop systtm fvuiction.

Later ^ve will return to this exarnpl^.* and, using a technique that ^vc ^vill develap in

Section

we LI .J,

will

show that tht system of Figure

1 L8 is

unstaLble if

^]Jt2>l.

[1L37)

Since the attenuation due to the propagation of s(}iind through the air decrea^s (i,e., K2 increases) a>> the distance between the speaker and the microphone decreases, if the mi
crophoiie is placed too close to the j^peaker, so that eq, (1 1.37) is satisfied, the system will
be unstable. The result of this instability is an excessive amplification and distortion of
audio signals.
It is inierestirtg to note that: positive, or what Black referred to as regenerative, feedback had also been known for some time before he invented his negative feedback amplifier and, ironically, had been viewed as a very useful mechanisni (in contrast to the skeptical view of negative feedback). Indeed, positive feedback can be useful. For exam-
ple, it was already known in the 1 920s that the destabilizing infl uence of positive feedback
cotjld be used to generate oscillating signals. This use of positive feedback is illustrated in Problem 11.54,
In this section, we have described a number of the applications of feedback. These
and others, such as the use of feedback in the implementation of recursive discrete-dme filters (see Problem 11.55). are considered in more detail in tfie problems at the end of die chapter. From our examin^ion of the uses of feedback and the possible stabilizing and destabilizing effects that it can have, it is clear that some care must be taken in designing and analyzing feedback si?itcma to ensure that the ciosed-loop system behaves in a desir-
able fashion. Specifically, in Sections 1 1.2.3 and 1 1.2.6, we have seen several examples
of feedback systems in which the characterisdcs of the closed^-loop system can be signif-
m icantly altered by changing the values of one or two parameters the feedback system.
In the venaaining sections of this chapter, we develop several techniques for analyzing the
effect of changes in such parameters on the ciosed-loop (jystem and for designing sy stems to meet desired objectives such as stability, adequate damping, etc.

1 1 .3 ROOT^LOCUS AMALYSIS OF LINEAR FEEDBACK SYSTEMS
As we have setn in a number of the examples and applications we have discussed, a useful type of feedback system is that iii wldch the system has an adjusiable ^ain K associated with ii. As this gain is varied, it is of interest to examine how the poles of the
closed-loop system change, since the locations of these poles tell ns a great dea! about the behavior of the system. For example, in stabilizing ai; unstable system^ die adjustable gain
is ujied to move the polen into the left-half plane for a ^ontintious-tirEie system or inside the unit circle for a discrete-time system, tn addition, in Problem 11,4^^, we show that feedback can be used to broaden the bandwidth of a first-order system by moving the pole so ii^ to decrease the time consiantof the system. Furthermore, jmt as feedback can be used

Sec. 11.3

Root-Locus Analysts of Linear Feedback Systems

833

to reloctfte the poles To improve %ysrem performance, as wc i>aw in Section 11 2.6^ there
is the ptJtenlial danger that with an improper choice <:f feedback a stable system i^an be destabilized, which is usually undesirable.
In this sectit)ti, wc discuss a particular method for examining the locus (i.e , the path)
in the complex plane of the poles of the c:!osed-loop system as anadjustatile gain is varied.
me The proL^edure, referred to as the n?or- focus fhad, is a gTitphical technique for p totting
the closed-loop poles of a ratjonal system tunclion Q{s) or Q{z) as a function [>f the value
t]f the ^ain. The tet:hniqtie wmrks in an identical manner for buLh continutjus-time and
discrete-time .systems.

f T .3,1 An introductory Example
To illusirate the biisic nature ot the root- lotus method for analyzing a feedback system, le: us rees amine the dfscnete-time example ccnsidered in the preceding sectrtin and specified by the system fanctjons

[etj,<M,23)] and

H(z}^ ]'^~ " T^

^^^'^^>

[e^.<11.24>l

G{z) - 2^z ' - ^-^,

(11.35*)

H^here ^ nov is viewed a.s aji adjustable gain. Then, as we noted earher£ the closed-loGp
system function is

[¨,.(l..25), QU> - TT^.^-^., - .r^i-T^'

'"^"'

In this example^ it is straightforward to identify the closed Jyop pole as being located at

= ^

2(1 - /3). [n Figure 11. 9(a), wc have plotted the locus i>rthepole for the system as ^

varies from (I to -i-sc. In pan (b) of the ftgiire, we have plotted the locus as fi varies from

to -£. In each phit, we have indicated the point z = 2, which -i.s the open -loop pole [i.e_,

^ il is the pole of Q{z) for

0). A& ^ increases from 0, the pole moves to the left of the

point z = 2 along the reaJ axis, and we have indicated this by including an arrow on the

< ^ thick line to show how the pole changes as is increased. Similarly, foi f^ 0, the pole of
U ^(;) moves lo the rig/ir of ; = 2, and the direction of the arrow in Figure 9(b) indicates

how the pole changes as the magnitude of f3 increases. Fo- U2 < ^ < 3/2, the pole lies

inside the unit circle, and thus£ the system is stable.

As a second example, consider a continuous-time feedback system with
^ ^(^>=

(H.41)

and
~ G(^) -

(1142)

^ where agairt represents the adjustable gain. Since His) and G{s) in this example are
algebraically iniemital to H{z) and Gi^z), respectively, in the preceding example, the same

8^4

^>0

<lm Unit cifcJe

Linear Feedtack Systems

Chap. 11

(fl.

(a)
Bm
Unrt circle

^<0

ffl.

Figure 1 1 .9 Root focus for the

Closed-loop system oi ep. fii -40) as

> the value of ^ js varied: ^a} p

D.

() ^ < 0. Note that we rtave marked

1^2 the point

that corresponds to

(b)

the pole location iwhen ^ ^ 0.

will be true for ttie closed-loop system function

^-' 2(1- ^)

(11-43)

vis-a-vis Q{z), ^n6 the locus of the pole as a function of $ will be idenliicaJ to the lotus in

thai e^ampl^^.

The relationship between ihes^j two examples stresses the Yaci that the locus of

the poles is deteimincd by the algebraic: eitpressions for the systeir functions of the for-

Vt-ard and fee<^back paths and is not inherently a&sociuted with whether the system is a

conrtmiou5-time or discrete- time system. How^ever, the interpretation of the result is inti-

mately connected with its continuous-titiie cr discrete-ttme context. In the discreie-time

case U if> the location of the poles in relation tit the unit tirtrle that is iinpt.)rl/inti whereas

in the continuous -time case it is their location in relation to the imaginary axi^. Thus,

as we hfise seen for the discrete time exairiple in eq. 111,40), the system is stable for

^ H 1^2 <

< 3/2, while the continuous-time system af e<j. (

^ .4^} is sLiible for

-' 1

1 1 .3.2 Equation for ttie Closed-Loop Poles
In the simple example cousidered in the previous section the rout Iolius was easy lo plot^
sinoe we could first e?tpljcHly determine the closed-loop pole as a function of the gain piiranieier '4nd then plot the location of the pi.ile as we changed the gain. For fnore complex

Sec. 1 1 .3

Root-Locus Arla^y$lS Of Unear feedback Systems

B3S

systems, one cannot expect to find suchMmple closed form expressitins forthe closed-loop poles. However it is .^till possible lo sketch accurately the locust of the poles as ihe v^lue

of the gain parameter is varied fr<]m -=t.to +==, without actually soivingfor the location of

the poles for any specific value of the gain. This technique for determining the root Iocls is

extremely useful in gaining insight into the characterisii^^s of (i feedback system. Also, as
we develop the method, we will see that once we have determined the root kjcus. there is a

relatively straightforward procedure for determining the value of the gain parameter that

We produc&s a closed-loop pole at any specified location along the root locus.

will phrase

our discussion in terms of the Laplace transform variable j, with the understanding that it

applies equally well to the discrete-time c^se.

Consider a modification of the basic feedback syfitem of Figure 11.3(a), where either
G{s} iMH{s)h cascaded with an adjustable gai n K. This is il 1 ustrated in Figure i 1 , 10. In either of these citses, the denominator of the closed-Joop system fiinction is 1 + KG(s)fHs).^

Therefore, the equation foi the poles of the closed-loop system are the isolations of the equation

I + KG{s)H{x) - 0.

(IL44)

Ml)

"^O

H{s]

-*-V{-}

O

G(s)

Q(s) =

KH[sl

1 + £<H[s)G(s>

(a)

H(s:

*

N- V(t)

G{S) -*

Q(3)-

Hfs)

1 + KH(&}G(s)

F^ure 1 1.10 Fa^db^ck systems
contammg an adjustaJ^le gain' (a) syrgtem in which the gain i$ located in the forward patti, (1>) system witti ttie ^ain
in ttie feedback path

'In the fdlyiving divcusUrtn, we ^iiumt f[)i simplicity (hat ihcrc is no poie-zero trdCiLdlutum id iht prfiduci G{5]H{.-^) The prfotntc tkf j,ijch pnle-?i;ro caii'jcilatliin.s does not cauic any real difficulties. anJ iht procedure we willuudint: here is caidy cMciulcd to th^t u^ase iPrublcm M.."^2>. It) fiCl tht iimple example at = die ViiCi uf Ihis \ccl\itn !r.-qL. r | ] 41 j a^id ^ [ 1 43JJ ^^f^,^ mvidvc a pole-7erN-j trtrttflldlJun, at i

836

Linear Feedback Svsterns

Chap. 11

Rewriting eq. (1 K44), we obtajn the basic equatioti determimng the closed-loop poles:

GU)H{s) - -i
A

(11.45)

The techni<iue fur ploiutig rhc root locus is based on ihe propenies of this e<]uaiion and its soluticms. Tn the remainder rf this settion, we will discuss some of these properties and
indicate how ihey can be exploited in determining the root lotrui.

f T .3.3 The End Pomts of the Root Locus: The Closed-Loop
Poles for K = and tK| = +"
Perhaps the most immediate observation that one c*in m;ike atkjyt the re>oi locus is that
K Lhbtained b> examining eq (11.45) for = Q and A^[ = sc. For A' = 0, the solution of
this equation must yiekl the poles of Gis)HO), since ]/K = ^. To illustrate, recall the example given by eqs, (11-41) and (11.42), It we let fi play the rtile of K, we see that
eq. (1 1.45) becomes

^ Therefore, for = 0, the pole of the system will be located at ^he pole of 2/(j -- 2) O.s..
at X = 2). which ngrees with what we depicted in Figure 1 1 .9. Suppose now thatfA^I ^ ==. Then i/K = 0, so that the solutions of eq ^1.45) must

approach Xht zeros of CU)Hii). If the order of the numerator of G(s)H{s) is smaller than

that of the denominator, then some of these zeros, equal in number to the difference in

order betwe&n the denominator and numerator will be at infinity.
Referring again to eq. (11.46), since iheorderof the denominator of 2/(y - 2) is I,

while the order of the numerator is zero, we conclude that in this e>ample there is one

zero at infinity and no zeros in the finite j-plane Thusn as |j3| -> =k;^ the closed-kop pole

approaches infinity. Again, this agrees wiih F:gure 11.9, in which the magnitude of the

> pole increases without bound as |;3| -* ^ for either ^

or ^ < 0.

While the foregoing observations provide us with basic information as to the closed-

loop pole locations for the extreme values of K, the following result is the key to oyr bein^

able to plot the root locus without actually solving for the closed-loop poles as explicit

functions of the gain.

T t.3.4 The Angle Criterion

Consider again eq. (11.45), Since the right-hand side of this equation is real, a point x\) can be a closed-loop pole only if the 3 eft-hand side of the equation, i.e.,G(.V())W(jG), is also reah Writing

- G(.vt,W(so)

\G(.sv)HU(,)\e''''^^'''"''''\

(1T47)

we sec that, for Gis^)Hisb> to be real, it must be true diat

^ ^;<Ciy,.m^,-:i

+,^

(11.48)

Sec. 11 .3

Root-locus Anafysfs of Uveal Feedback Systens

B37

That is, for i^ to be a closed' loop pole, we must h<ive

W <C? (Jo^ (-?o) ^ integer multiple of TT.

(H 49)

Returning tt> eq tl 1 .46), we see inimediately that in order for 2/{s(i - 2) to be real.
]l is necessary thai vi be real. For more ct>mplex system functions, it is ntJl aa easy to
G H determine the values of ^o for which {S\i) (i^J is real. However, as we w.ll sec, the use
of the angle criterion given by eq. ( 1 1 .49), |;ogether with the geometric method described in Chapter 10 for evaluating <G(io)J^(Jo)i greatly facilitates the determi nation of the
root Ichcus
The angle LTiienon given by eq (H .49) provides us with a direct method for deter-
A nnning whether a point ^n could be a closed-loop pole for some vaJue of the gain K.
furlhtjr cxaminjititm of eq, (11.45) gives us a way in which to calculate the vulue of the
gaii: corresponding to any point on the root locus. Specifically, suppose that s^^ satisfies

<G(in)//UDl = odd multiple of :?r.

(11.50)

Thenf^-'^^'^'J^'f^'^' = - U and from cq. (11.47) we see that

G{s,i)H{s,^)= -\G{Si^H{s^)\.

ai-M)

we Substituting eq. (1 1 .5 1 } into eq ( 11 .45)>

find that if

K= 1

p,

(11. ?2)

then jft is a soluti[>n of the equation and hence a clcssed-loop pole.
Similarly, il\ift satisfies the Ciindition
<C(.fu)/7(.tlj) = even multiple of tt,

then

G{s^\ti{Si;) - |C(.va)//(Jo)|.

Thus, if

^ ^ -r

-Tr

(11.53) (11.54) (lK-^5)

then Jo is a solution of eq. (11.45) and hence a-ciosed-loop pole.
For the example given in eq. ( 1 1,46), if .t^ is on the real line and s^ < 2, then

<{

z|= -TT,

(11.56)

^ and from eq. ( 1 1 52), the value of for which Jn is the closed-loop pole is
^- ^ = r4^ =

(11.57)

833

Lin^r Feedback Systems

Chap n

That is,

Tu = 2(1 - ^),

(IJ.SSl

which agrees with eq, ( 1 1 .43).
Sunimarizing ttie lasi two observations that we havÈ made, we see that the rool locus
far the cl{>sed-Ioop system, that Is, the set of points in the complex j-pUne that aic closed-
^ loop poles for some value of A^ as varies from -¯^ tt) +co, are pnecisely those points that
satisfy the angle ;;ondition of eq. (1 1.49), FuTthermore:

1. A points for which

¨5(jo)ff(Jo> = oddmuhipleofiT

(11.59)

> is on the root lotus and Js a closed-Loop pole for so(ne value of A^ 0, The vaJue of
tht gain that makes st) a clos^ed-loop pole is given by eq. { 1 1.52),
A 2, point i'o for which

<G (Sii) ff {st)) ^ even niuhiplc of TT

(11 60)

is on the root locus and is a cIosed-lot>p pole for some value of A^ <

the

gain that

n\akes so

a closed-loop pole

is

given

by

^q.

11.55).
{

The value of

Therefore, we have now reduced the problem of determining the root locus to that of [searching for points that satisfy the angle requiremenis given by eqs. (11,59) and (IL60].
These equations can be refined further to a set of properties that aid in .sketching the root locus. Before discussing these properties, however, let us consider a simple example.
Example 1 T . 1
Let

s+ \

r+2

Recall that in Section 9,4 we di.scujpsed the geometric ev^aluation ot Laplace traiisft>rms In that section, we saw that the angle of the rational Laplace transform

^

(n.62i

evaluated at -iOint poirt ^q id the o:>mplc\ plane equals the sutn. nf the angltr.s of (he
vectfjT^ frorii eacK of the '.ero? ic j(j minus the sum of the angles from each of the polei
to j<. Applying this to the pixxluct of G{s)H(f), where G<sf and His) are as given in
eq. (11 fil )^ wc can determine geometncally tho*¨ points in tbc i-pliuie (hiu saiisfy the
angle criteria, ^i. (H-^^) and (11.60), and therefore can sketch the root locus. In Fijiure l\.\ L we have plotted the poltft cf GiA )H(s ) and h a^e denoted \>y fl aiid
4> the angles from each of the poles to the point .v,j. Let us fir^l [¨sl tht' ar.gle cfjtenon

Sac, 113

Root-Locus A^alys^s of Lirtea'Feedtack Systems

839

Figure 1 1 . T T
ple 11 1.

Geometric procedure for evaluating angle crrteoon in Exam-

ffir points .v<H on the re^ axis. To begin with, the angk contribution from both polei ii zero \^hen vi is on the real axis to the right of - 1 . Thii&,

<G(5y)//(jij> =^ :> =^ O'TT,

Jo real and greater than -1,

(11.63)

^ < and by cq. (11.60X these pointj; are on the root jocu.'* for

0. For puints between tile

- two poles, the poVe at \ cftnli^buies an an^le of - tt, and thie pole at --2 conmbutes 0.

Thus,

<G(SQ)fI(Sf) = -TT,

< < sa real, -2 jo

-1,

(11.64)

^ These pointfi are oa the Ioclls for > 0, Finally, each pole contributes ao angle of -tt
when.T^j iE tea] and less Ihan -3, so that

<GlSff)/^(%) = -S-ir,

Ju real and bss than -2.

K < Tliepefore, these points afe on the locus for

0.

Let us now ^Kaimne points in the upi>er half of the j-plane, (Since the impulse

respuDsei are real-valued, the complex poles otc^ir in conjugate pairs. Therefore, we

can immediately determitte the pole^ i n the io\ve:T half-plane after we have exajnmned the
M G upper half) From Figure I I , the argle of (S(t)M (su) at the point i[> is

<GtJ(0^fir>)= -(d + <p)

(i;.65)

Al^, it is clear that as so ranges over ifie upper half-plan*i (Sjut not the real axis)^ we have

0<y<7r. 0<*<iT

(11 66)

TtltLS,

-2Tr< <G(i)/f(.0< 0.

(11.67)

Therefore, we see immediaiely (hat no point in the upper half-plane can be on the Jixrus < for /t Ismce <C(s)W(j> never equals ati even multiple of tt]. In addition, if s^^ is to
be on the locus for A' > 0. we omst have

^G(m)Hiso) =- -(0 +*^J - -TT.

(1I.6S)

1

64Q

Linear Feedback Systems

Chap, 1

[>r

& = - IT

tf>.

C]l,69)

EAamming The geometry of Figure liAl, we see that this occurs only for those points

located on ihe straight line thac is parallel to the iiQagmary axis and that biyects the line

joining the poles at --1 and --2. We have now ejiamiried the entire .t-plane and have

K dsjtermincd aI| those points, on the root locus. In addition, we know that for

-- 0, the

closed-loop poies eqiLaJ the poles of G{s)^{s\ and as \K\ --> TM, the etosed-loop poles

go to the zeros of G{j)W(j>> which tn this case are both ai infinity. Putting these lesuLts

together, we can draw the entire root locus, depicted in Figure 11.12. in which we have

K > K indicated the direction of increasing ^|. both for

Oand for -=^0.

>-^

-2

[R*

-2

-1

(Rn

M > Figure 1

2 Root locLs for Ejcampie 1 1 .1 , (a) /C

0; {b) K -^0. The

d = = poles G{s)H{s), which are tocated at s

-1 and s

-2, are indicated.

> Note from the tigure that for /t

there are two branches of the root locus and

K Ihat the same is true for <:0. The reason for the existence of two branches is thai

in thifr example the closed-loop system is a second-order system and consequently Keis

two ptiles for any specified value ot K. Thetefore, the root lucu<i has two branchtis, each

of which traces the Location of one of the closed-loop poles as A' is varied, and for any

particular value of ^, there is one closed-loop pKjle on each branch. Again^ if we wish to
K calculate the value of for which a specific point jfi on the Iwus is a closed-loop pole,
wccan use eqs. (11.52) and (11.55)

Sec 1 1 .3

feot-LOcus Analysis of Linear Feedback Systems

a* i

1 1 .3.5 Properties of the Root Locus
The procedure outlined in the preceding .subsection provides us, in principle, with a method foi determining the root U)cus for any continuous-time or discrete-time LTl feedback sys-
tem. That is, we simply determine, graphically or otherwise, all tiiose point* that satisfy eq. 01 59) or eq. {\ 1 ,60) Fortunately there are a number of other geometric pn>perties concerning root loci that make the i^k^tching of a locus far less tedious. To begin our discussion of the-^e prcperties, let us assume that we have placed Gi.f)M{j) in the standard
foim

n (^ - p*]
¯(^^(^^ ^ '-^^'--f^i^ - "^

''TM^

where the ^/s denote thezero.s and the a^s denote the poles. In general, the^ie may be complex. Also, from eq. (11,70), we see that we are assuming that the leading coeffi cien: in both the numerator and the denominator of G{s)M{s) is + 1 . Thi^^ can always be
achieved by dividing the numemtor and denominator by the denominator coefHoient of j"
and absorbing the resulting numerator coefticientof ;;'" into ^e gair K. For exan^plc,

and the quantity i2f^)K is then regarded as the overall gain that is varied in deteroilnin^
the root locus.
Weassurne, in addition, that

m ^ n,

(1L72)

whii;h istiie case that IS usually eTicountered in practice, I^Problem 1 IJ3 considers the case
m > n.) The following are some properties [hat include earlier observations and that aid
in stelchitig the rt>(>t locus.

^ Property 1: For =- 0, the solutiotis of cq. (1K45) are the poles of GtJ)ffU^ SinL^e ^ we are assuming n pi^lcs, the root locus has n branches, each one planing (for = 0)
at J ptileof G{.t)//(5).

Property I incl^ides the general versit^n nf a fact which we noted in Example 11,1: that there is one branch of the root locus for each closed-loop pole. The next property is iho
simply a restatement of one of our earlier observations.

Property 2: As \f<C\ ~+ ==, each branch of the root locus approaches a iero of

we m -- m 0(s)H(s]. Since

are as^iatnijig that

i^ rt, m

of these zero's are itt infinity.

&

1

842

Linear FeEdback Syslems

Chap. 1

Property 3: Part^ t>f the reat .?-axis that Ue lo (.he lefl of an odd number uf real ptLcs

K > and zeros of G{h )H[s) are on the root locui for

0. Parts of the real A-axi5 that lie

to the left oi an r^v^H number (po&sjbly zero) of poles and zeros of G{s)His) aie on the
< ro^t locus foj A" 0.

We can show that Property ^ is true as foUows: From our discussion in Example 11.1

and from Figure we 1 1 , 13(a), see that if a point on the real :t-axis is to the right of a real

On pf>lt or zero of f^(.F>//(.v-), that pf>le or j^ro contributes zero to <G(Ao)//(j;f]).

the other

hand, if j.j is to the left of li zero, that 7.ero contributes +77, whereas \f .^n ^^ tf> the left af
a pole, wc get a contribution of -77 (since we subtract the pole angles). Hence, i( s^ is to

the left of an odd number of tcliI poles and TeroJ^, Lhe toial coiitribution of these poles and

zeros is an odd tuultiple of tt, whereas if V] is to the left of an even number of real poles and y.euii^, the total c^ontrJbutJon is an even multiple of tt. From cqs, { 1 1 .59) and ( J 1.60),
wc will have the result stated in Propeny 3 if we can show that the total contribution

from all poles and zeros with nonzero imaginary parts is an even multiple of tt. The key

here is that such poles and zeros occur in compi en -conjugate pairs, and we can consider

the contribution from each such pair, as illustrated in Figure 1 hn(b)- The symmctr>' in

the picture clearly indicates that the sunt of the an^le^ from this pair to any point m, on the
real axis is precisely Irr. SummLng over all conjugate zero pairs and subtracting the sum

over all conjugate pote pairs, we get tbe desired result. Thus, any segment of the rciil line

^u*

-^-- ^ Anc^e of zero radians ^ -^ ^

^ --
^_

>o

Angle of tt radians
ffl^

(a)
2tt -H

(H^

Figure 11.13 (a| Angle contnbu-

fton from reaJ poies and zeros to a

point on the real axis; (b) total angle

contribution fmm a complect- Doniugate

{t£

pole pair to a pomt on tne rea] axrs.

Sec. 1 1 .3

Root-Locus Analysis of Linear Feedback Systems

8+3

< between reai poles or zeros is on the root locus either for /T > or for K 0. depending

(in whether it lies to the left of nn odd or an even number of poles and zerus of G(s}His)

Ai one consequence of Propenies 1 through 3, consider a segment of the real axis

between two pole*i i}fO{s)H{s), with no zeros between these poles. From Property I the

root locus begins at the poles^ and from Property 3 the entire portion of the real a)(is between

the two poles will he on the root locus for a positLvc or neg:ative range of values of K.

Therefore, a.s lA^I increases from zero, the two branches of the root locus that begin at these
polc.^ move toward each tjther along the segment of the real axis between the poles. Fnim

Propejty 3. us \f(\ increasss toward infinity; each branch of the root locus must approach

a iCTo. Since there are no zenjs along that portion of the real axis, the emly way that this

can happen is if the branches break off into the complex plane ftir |^| ^uffn:: ientl)^ lar^e

H This is illustrated in Figure

> !2, in which the locus tor /C has a portion between

K two red poles. As is increased, the root locus eventually leaves the real axis, forming

two complex-conjugate branches. Summarizing this discussion, we have the following

properly of the root locus;

Ihroperty 4: Branches of the root locus between two real poles must brealt off into the complex plane for \K\ large enough.
Properties 1--4 serve to illustrate how characteristics of the root locus can be deduced from eqs. (11.45), (1 1.59J, and(ll.fiO). In many cases, plotting the poles and zeros
of Gis)ff{s) and then usii^ these four properties suffices to provide a reasonably accurate sketch of the mot locus. iSee Examples 11.2 ajid 11.3.) fn addition to these propenies, however, there aie DumeR>tis other characteristics of the ri>i"'t locus that allovn one to ob-
tain sketches of increasing accuracy. For example, from Property 2, we know that n - ttt
branches of the rool locus approach infinity. In fact, these branches appmoch infinity at specific angles that can be calculated, and therefore, the branches are asymptotically parallel to lines at these angles. Moreover, it i^; possible to draw in the asymptotes and then dciermine the point at which they intersect. These two properties and several others are
A illustrated in Problems 11.34-11.^6 and 11.41-11 42, more detailed development of
the root-locus nnethod can be f^und in more advarvced tejLts such as thf^se listed ii^ the bibliography at the end of the biMjk,
In the remainder of this section we present two examples, one in continuous time and one .n discrete time, that illustrate how the four properties that we have just described
allow us to sketch the root locus and to deduce the stability characteristics of a feedback system as the gain A" is varied.
Example 1 1.2
Let

K FrtNin properties 1 and 2, the r^njl locus far either positiv-L: or /C i"bCg:ji(ive sturt^; ;tt the
pointi J = - 1 and s = -2. One branch temiinates at the zero at v - 1 and the other ai

infinity.

> Let us first consider /T

m The rnol lotus in this case ii illustrated

Fig-

ure li.l4(aj. From Property 1 we cjn identify tKe regions of the real a\i\ that ire tm

844

1,

Linear Feedback Systems

Chap. 1

-e-

-2 -1

(H.

> K Figure 11.14 Root locus for Btampte 11.2: (a) K 0: {h) ^ 0. The
poles ot G[s]ti{s) aft s ^ -1 and 5 = '2 and the zero of G(s}H{s) at s = 1
are indicated in the fiflure.

0-- < < ^ the root locus for >

speci(lcally.tR*{s} -2and-l [R^s} < 1 Therefnn;, one:

> branch of the root locos fuT A' Ooiiginatesat j - - 1 and approaches i -- 1 as^ --> k.

K The other begins nts = - 2 und extends to the left toward (R^{j} - -^ us --^ +^.

K > K Thus, we 5K that for

D. tf is sufficiently large, the system will become

unstable^ as one of the closed-loop poles moves into the righi-h^lf plane. Tfie procedure

that we hase used for sketching the root locus does not, of toutsc, indicate the value
K of for which this instability develops. However, for this particular example, we see

K that the valut sif for which The mstability occur'; co(TC:j,fK}nds to the root locus passing through \ = 0. Cunsequsntly, fnomeq. (11.52)^ the conrcs ponding value ot"^ is

^'
\CiO)H{0)\

Ul.74^

K < ^ ^ TTius, the system is stable for G i^

2, but i^ unstable for

2.

K < > For

i), the portions of the real asis lying on the root locus are CR*-{j:} 1 and

< < -2 (S\-e{s)

-I. Thui, the root locus again. stans at the points .\ = -2 and j =

1

< < moving intc the region -2 ^^{.v}

- L At some point, it brtaki off ]Jtlt> (he tumples

plane and followsatfajectory such thatil reiums to the real aiiv for T > 1. Upon the looE

tow^ locus' return to the real iJtis. one brunch moves to the left

the icro a[ j = I and

= the other to the nght toward y m, as indicated in Figure 11.14(b), in which we have

displayed an accurate plot of the tcjo! loeus for A" < 0.

Sec, 1 1 3

Root'LocLJS Analysisof Linear Feedback Systems

845

Rules car also he developed [o indicate the locations at which the root locus leaves
and enters the real iixis. Even witht^ut thai preciic a descriptionT however, we can ikeich
ihe general shape of the root locus In Figure 1 1 14(b) and tan therefore deduce thai for
K < 0, the system alio becomes unstable for \K\ sufficiently lai^e.

Example 11 .3

Consider the discrete-time feedback system tllus-trated in Figure 11 15- Tn thi^: case,

'
z
G{z)ffU) =-
(l-^^-')(l-i^-')

z
(^-^-\)

(11 75)

x(r|

&~^ K

(1-^z '}

+- y(n|

tl- ^2-^)

IMS Figure

Discrete-time feedback system of Example 1 1.3.

As discussed at (he beginning of this section, the techniques for sketching The root locus

of a discrete-time fsedback system are identical to those used in the continu^Qs-time

case. Therefore, in a jnannei exactly anaJogotis to that of the preceding example, we

can deduce the hasic form of the root lucus for this example, which is illustrated in

Figure 1 i.l6. Tn this caic the portion of the real mis between the xwo poles of G{z)Hiz\

= K > K = (at I ]/4 and z

I ^) is on the root Jocus for

Q^ and aj? iiicreases the locus

hre^s oE^ into the complex plane and. returns to the axis at sornc point in the left-half

plane. From there, one branch approai^^Iies the zero of G{z)Hiz) at ; =0, and the other
K approj^thes inanity as Jl -+ TMj. The form of the ryot locus for -^ ccnsists of two

branches on the real axis, one approaching and the other infinity-
As we remarked earlier, while the form of the root locus does not depend un

whether the system is a. continuous-time or di.'screte-time system, any c<>nc]usion le-

gardjng stability based on examining the locus certainly does. For thiJi example, we i;an

conclude ttiat for \K\ sufficiently large the system is unsttable, since one of the twii poles
ha'j magnitude greater than l.In particular, froin the /f > root Ihjcus in Figure 11.16(a), *c see that the transition from stability to initahiliiy occurs when one of the cU^^ed towp
K poles is at ^ - - 1 . From eq. ( II .52). the ouiresponding value of is

K-

]5

fG(^i)//(-1j|

(11.76]

Similarly, from Figure 1 Ll^(b), tht stability -instability traiwition oceui^ when one of the tloscd-loop poles is at ^ = 1, and from eq. (11.55), the corresponditig value of ^is

m Putting thik tf>gether, we see that thectosed-loop system Figure 11 16 is stable if

846

1

Linear Feedback Systems

Chap. 1

y/ Unit Circle

JO-I-^K

m^

^¨*
/ Unit circle

-- *^^^ Ër

1

1

CR,

*

2

{bf

^ > Figure 1 1,T6 Root locus for Example 11.3: {a)

0; (b) ^ < 0. The

poles of G{z)H{z) at 7 = 1/^ and 7 = 1/2 and ttw zero of G{z)H{z) at 7 =

are indicated in the figure.

-l<K<'i

( II 7S)

K and js unstable for outside this range.

1 A1 THE NYQUIST STABJUTY CRfTERION
As developed in Section 1 1.3, the root-locus techtiique provides detailed infomriation concerning the location of closed-loop poles as :he system gain is varied. From root-lucus
K plots, one can determine the damping and the ^tahility characteristics of the system as
is varied. Determination of the root locus requires the analytic description of the sysiem

Sec. 11.4

The Nyquist Stability Criterion

847

fun^'tions of Ihe forward and feedback: path;; and is applicable onty when these transforms areraHonal Forexamplejt cannot be direcdy applied in situations in which our kmwledge of the sysiieni functions ij obtained purely from experimental ioti.
Iti this section, we introduce another method foi the determination of the stability of
feedback systems as a function of an adjustable gain parameter. This technique, referred to as the Nyifuixt criterion, differs from the root-locus method in two basic ways Unlike the root- locus methods the Nyquist criterion does not provide detailed information concerning the location of the closed-loop poles as a ftinction of K^ but rather^ simply determines
whether or not the system is si^le for any specified value of it. On the odier hand, the
Nyquist criterion can be applied to nonrational system functions and in situations in which no analytic description of the forward and feedback path system functiims is available.
Our objective iti this section is to outline the basic ideas behind the Nyquist cnlerion
for both continuous-time and discrete-time systems. As we will see, bcnh the discretetime and continuous-timt Nyquist testis are the result of the same fundamental concept,
although, aA with the root- locus method, the actual criteria for stability differ because of
the differences between continuous and discrete time. More detailed developments of the
ideas behind the Nyquist criterion and its use iii the design of feedback systems can be found in texts on the analysis and synthesis of feedback systerns and automatic control systems, including those listed in the bibliography at the end of the bogk.
To introduce the method, let u^ recall that the poles of the closed-loop .systems of Figure 1 L 10 and their discrete -time counterparts are the solutions of the equations

1 -I- KG<s)H{s) ^

(continuous time P

(1179;!

and

1 + KGiz)H{z) =

(discrete time).

(11.80)

For disct^te-time systems, we want to deterroine whedierany of the solutions of eq. (1 1.80)
lie outside the unit circle, and for continuous-time systems whether any of the solutions of eq, (1 1 ,79) lie in the right half of the j-plane. The Nyquist criterion fixes this by examination of the values of G(s)H{x) along the jw-axis and the values of G(z)fi(z} along the unit
circle. The basis for this is the encirclement property, which we develop in the following
subsection.

11.4-1 The EncircJement Property
Consider a general rationa] function W(p). where j? is a complex variable,'' and suppose
that vi/e plot W(/?) for values of;? along a closed contour in the ^-plane, which we traverse in a clockwise direcdon. Thh is illustrated in Figure 11 .17 for a function W{p) that has
C two zeros and no poles. In Figure lM7(a) we show a closed contour in tbe;?-plane. and
in Figure 1 1.17(b) we plot die closed contour of the values of W{p) as p varies iirotind C.

'Becauw we Will unc the property w* aie atwut [u develop for ImjiIi cotitill¨cius-t]me *un3 discrttc-limc teeilback systems, we have chosen lo d-scribe it in terrnii nf a general complex variablep tr the ri^M sub&etnon we use this property tu unalyze continuous-titne rccdhack ijitem^, where che Cflinpka. variable is s Following
m this, in Section II 4 ^ we use the entire lemeat property for<Jiscrete-tinic feedback systeni^, whivh tuni-rxi
die complex variable ib Z-

843

Linear Feedbac;h Sysiems

Cha:i. 11

p- plane

^tt% (b)

W- plane
(R^

Figure f f .1 7 Basic encjrcleFnent property The dosed curve in (b} represents i plot of the vAliiG^ Q^ W{p) for vs\\iE& of fi afong the curve C
m (a). H&re, the arrow on the curv¨ C
in (a) indicates the direction in which
G is travaraed, and tha avro^J in ^bi
indicates the corresponding direction along the contour of values of W{p].

In thi^ example, theit is one zero of W{p) inside ih& contour and one zero ot Wip) outside
C the contour. At any point p on the angle of 1^(;>) is the sum of the angles of the two
vectors V| and v^ to the point p As we traverse the conl:our once, the angle cf*\ of ttie
vector from the ^ero inside the contour encounters a riet change of -'2tt radians, whereas the angle t^ of the vector from the zero outside the contour encounters no net change Thus, on the plot of W{p}, there is a net change in angle of -Itt. Said another way, the
ptotof W(/?> in Figure 11.17(b) eticircles the origin once in the clockwise direction. More
generally, for an arbitrary rational Wip), as we traver^.a closed contour in ihe clock-
wise direction^ ajiy poles and zeros of Wip) outside the contour will centribute no net
change to the angle of Wi^pX whereas each zero inside the contour will cuntiibute a net change of --2tt and each pole inside will contribute a net change of +2tt. Since each
net change of --l-rr in W(p) corresponds to one clockwise encirclement of the origin ii\ the
plot of Wip\ we can state the foUowir^ basic enanclement property:

C Encirdenhekit Property ; As a cl osed contour in the p-p\ ane is traversed once i n the
clockwise direcdon, the corresponding plot of W(p) for values of p along the contour
encircles the oiigin in the clock wi&e direction a net number of times equal to iVie number of zeros minuis the number of poles contained within the contour

In applying this statemeutj a counterclockw^is^ enciTclementis interpreted a5 the neg-
ative of one clockwise encirclement For example, if there is one pole ^nd no zeros inside the contour, there will be one counterclockwise, or equivalendy, minus-one clocki^ise,
encirclement.

Sec. 11,4

The Myqu^st Stability Crrtemn

Example 1 1 .4
Consider the function

-

W{p) -

1

ip + lXp^^P + U

^rrt
p-ptane
O^ -ˋffl^

^m
W-plane
(R,

849
(11,81)

{a)

p-plane

^
^' X

-Q-
fflif

(ti)
p-plane

W- plane W- plane

Ffgure 11.18 Basic encirclement property for Example 11.4 (aj the contour encircles no poles or zeros and consequently W{p) has no encirclements of Wie origin, (b) the contour encircles one pole and therefore W{p] has one
encirclement of the origin; (c) the contour encircles three poles artd ther3fofe W{p] has three encirclements of the origin;

S50

1

Lrnear Feedback S^tems

Chap. 1

W-plane

(dj
p-pter>e

W-plane

Figure 1 1 .18 Confffiued (d) the contour encircles one pole and one zero and therefore W{p) has no encirclemenls of tfie origiDj {e) Ihe contour encircles three pol&s and one r¨ra l//[p) has two encirclements of the origin

[n Figure 11-18, wc depitlseveral tloscJ tonttTury in the complex ^-ptane an J the fgue-

&poiiding plyts of y^[p) along Ciith of these contours. In Figure 11 . J 8(aj, the contour C^|

Joefi not ent:irt;le iiny of ihe poles or zei\ts ot ^{,p\ and consequently, the plot oi" >1^(p) hiij: n<; net cntirtl^iTtientiufitero In Figure 11, l8(b>,only ttie pt^le sap ^ - 1 ii ton-tui ned

WLthin the cyntourC^, an J The plot ol'H'(j?J entircles ihe ongin once in the t'ounterciock-
O wise direction (minus-one clockwiiieentiriclementE J. In Figure ]l.lii<ct. encircles all

md three poles,

the plot of W(p) encircles the origin three times in a counterclockwise

Q direction. lr> Figure lLlh(d)j encircles one pole and ojiezerOj and therefore, the plot

m of W{p) hi^H no net encirclements of the origin. Finally, Figure ll.lSt^e), all ol the

poles and the one zero of Vi^(^) are contained withm C5, and thus, the plot of W(p}'dlong

this cyntour has two net tounterclockwibe encirclements of the origin.

1 1 .4.2 The Nyquist Criterion for Continuous-Time LTI Feed&ack Systems
Iti this siectian, we exploit the encirclenietir property in examming the stability of the
cotitinuouft-time feedback aystetn of Figure H.IO, Stiibiiity of this system requires that

Sec. 114

The Nyquist Stab lity Cnterion

851

no zeros of I + KC(s)H{s), or eqtiival&ntlj, of tKe function Rls) = ^-i GO)H(s)

(11.82)

lie in the right half of the j-plane. Thus, in applying the general result developed in the
preceding subsection, we cun consider the contour indicated in Figure 11.19. Frotn the
plot of Ris), as s traverses the contour C we can obtain a count of the tnimber of zeros
minus the number of poles of R(s) contained within the conlwur by counting the number
M of clockwise encirclements of the origin. As increases to infinity, this then corresponds
10 the number of zeros minus the number of poles of ff(i) in the right half of the j-plane.

rf PH

S'Plarie

M-'

j

,

,

A

-^ -|M^

lF*:

Rgure t T . 1 9 Closed contour con-

twining a portton Off the right-half plane.

M as

- =^, the contour encloses fhe

entrre nghi-half plane

M Let us examine the evaluation of RU) itiang the contour in Figure 11.19 lI'x in-
creases to infinity. Along the semicircular poilion of the contour extending into the right-
M half plane, we must ensure that i?(i) remains bounded as moreases. Accordingly, wc
will assume that R(s) has at least as many poles as y^ros. In that case.

+ + ¨(J) = h^fji"

b>, ,i"-'

+ Q,,S" "r a£ \ii" '

(1LS3)

and

lim R{i) - ^- - i:onstant.

(11.84)

M Therefore, as increases to mtimiy, the value of i?0> docs not change as we travcrst the

semicircular part of the contour, and consequently, the constant value along this part is

^ equal to the value of /?(s) at the end points [i,e.£ R{j{o) at qj

=t^l.

Therefore, the plot of R{s) along the contour of Figure 11.19 can he obtained by
-- plotting fits) along the part of the contour tlut coincides ^ith the imaginary axis that is,
the plot of R{jii>) as to varies from -=^ to 4 ^. Since Rijiij) equals 1/^ -r G{jijj}H{jtnf.

R(s\ along The contour c^n be drawn from knowledge of Gijiii] and Hijo^). U both

the forward- and feedback -path systems are stable, Gijw) and ijoj) are simpl> the

frequency-response functions of these systems. However, the encirclcmii-ot pn>perty for

the general function W{p)is simply a proporty of complex funciiims; i: has nothing to

8S2

Linear Feedback S/stems

V Chap.

do with whether W{p) arose as the Laplace or z-tr*¨sform of any signal and, conse-
quently, has nothing to do with regions of convergence. TTius. even if the forward- and
feedback-path systems are unstable, if we examine the plot of ihe ^ncrian Rijiit) =
1/A' + G(jtif]H{Ja}) for -<£ < ij < TM^, we know ihat the net number of clockwise en-
circlements Gf the origin will equal the number of 2Èros minus the nuinber of poles n^f R{s)
m chat He the righi-haJf plane.
Fyjthermore, from eq, {liUlX we 5ee that the poles of R{s) are simply the poles
of Cis)H{s), while the zen>s of li{x) are the closed-loop poles. In addition, since
G{jw)H{jii}) = R{J(i)} - l/K^ it fallows that the plot of C{JM)H{jii}) encircles the point -- 1/A' exactly A'A many times as /?(/&*) encircles the origin. The plot of G{jw)H(jcif) as it} varies from - £ ty +¨= is called the Nyqulst piot. From tfie encircleinent property, we
ihen see that

TI^,ne

numbH er

c
i>r

Cl\ ocIkwise

encirc1lement*s of* vtuhe point*

1w/pA-

Lby^

t1h. e

NvryJqTuistT plI ot^ *-

Th^ number of right-half

,

",
,

,

=

plane closed- loop polest

^,
mjnus

.
the

numb*er

jr

^

oi right-

v ^^ j^^^f

pli ane

pol, es

of^

G,-i/s\Hr{r.s)..

^(,I,LS^5^),

While the open-loop system G{b)H{s) may have unstable poles, for the closed-loop system to be stiible we require no right-half plane closed-loop poles. This yields the amtinuousWne Nyquist liability criterion:

Continuou^s-^Time Nyquist Stjibillty Criterion: For the closed-loop .sysiem to be
stable, the net number ijI clackwise encircleirtentsof the point -- \/K by the Nyquist plot
of Gi jo>)H(j<ii) must equal tninuis the number v\ righl-half-plane pofes of (j(.s)/f U)
-MKhy Hquivalently, the net nUtTiber nf counterclockwise encirclements of the point
the Njquist plot of G{jv>)H{j(i>) must equal th^ number sf right-half-plane poks of
Gis)His),

For example, if the forward- and feedback-path systems are stable, then the NyquLSl plot is simply the plot of the frequency lespcmse of the cascade of these two systems. In this case, since there are nopolesof GC^)Wfs) in the right- half plane, the Nyquist criterion
requires that, for stability, the net number of encirclements of the point --\1K must be
zero.
ExampJe 11,5

G{s)= ^-, H{s)= -p^y.

(11.86)

The Bode plot tor G(ja>}H(_j{i3) is i^huwn in Figure 11.20, The Nyqui^t plot depictc:d
m U Figure 21 is cons^mtted dirtclly from the plots of the log msgnilucie and phLi\e
of G{)tij)f^{Jiif'). That is, each point on the I^yquist plot has polar coordinator l:c.>o-
si^tmg of the ijiagnittije \G{Jbi)fiijbf)\ and angle <G(/tu)/f (yw) for some value
of (!}. The tourdinatiis of G(y¨}//(j'w) for to < are obtained fro-m the values foe
M > i) through the use of the conjugate symmetry property nf Vijoi)^{}{>>) This
properly Trlanife^l^ itself geometncally in a very simple way, whitih facilitatqs the sketching yf tht Nyquist plot lor any fetdbact systtm composed of systems v^ith

Sec. 1 1 .4

The NyquJst Stability Crrterion

853

Ode

3^ -20

I

i

-40

t5 -60^

80 -100 -120

1
0.01

~^

^\
\^^

1

1

0.1

>,^
1

10

100

^^__^

s

Tt/4 _

u/2 --
3^

<3
V

37i/4 --

"^
^.
\^
^\__

1

1

1

0.01

0.1

1

1

J

10

100

Figure 1 1.20 Bode ptot for G(hi]HUto) in ExaTiple 11.5.

*¨£{G(jtit)HUw)}

1

(S^f{G{^uf)H{\^,i}]

Figure I f .21 Nyquist plot of fi(/w)W[jiu>) for Example 11 5. Ttie arrow on
the curve indicates the dirediort erf increasrng ^j.

B54

Linear FeedtMCkS/stems

Cnap 11

real impulM re&potises. Specitically, ^inoe \G(-jat}H{-Jtif)\ --= \G(jiMViiJij^y and

^ <G(-jhj}H(-J(ii} ^ <G\jfi>)H(jti>), the Nyquist plot of G(Ja})HiJiii) for ¨j

^ IS artfltttion abouliht; real axis of [he pjotforoj

0, Noii;alSL> (hat wc havt included

an arniw un the Wyquist pJot in Figure 1121. Tliis arrfjw indicates tlic direcriori of in-

creasing ot. Tha; is, it indicat^^ the dircttiati in which, the NyquisT pint is traver^ {a.^
if) varies from -^ TO +^;) for the ciiuntlog of eneirckmcnti in the ^tppMcaiion of the

Nyqiii^t eii tenon.

In ihis example there are no right-hil f-plane open-luop poles, and consequently,

the Wyquist criterion requires that, for stability, there be no net encirclements of the
point -MK. Thun, by inspection of Figure 11.21, we see that the closed-loop system
-- will be liable if the point -- VIK falls outside the NyquJst contour (hat js, if

-K ^ " or -k"'-

tn.s7)

^^hich \^ ef|tii>'a]ent to
K -^Q or ^> K>-\.

{U.m

Combining diese two conditions^ we obtain the result that the closed-loop system will be
stahk for any choice of A" greiter th^n -1.

Example 1 1.6

Consider now

CU)Hi:s) = ^

s+ 1

{s - iXi^-^ 1)

(I1.S9J

The Nyquist plot for this system is indicated in Figure 1].32. For this ej: ample. Gis)H{s) has one nght-half-plane pole. Thus, for j^tability we require one counterc; lock wise encir-
clement: of the point --UK, which in turn requires that the point -\IK fall jnsuLe the contour Hence, we will have sitability If and only if-- 1<-1^/l'<0. thatis^ if A' > 1.

tfr¨{3(JMH(j¨i)}

tt>=0

tfl^fG[j[fl)H{jti^)}

Figure 1 1 ,Z2. Nyt^iist plot for Example 11.6 The arrov* on ttw cufv¨ indi-
cates the direction of increasing u>.
In the foregoing discussion, we have introduc:ed and illustrated a form for (he Nyquist
stability criterion that applies to an extremely large class of feedback systetns. In addition,

S^c, 114

The Nyquist Stability Criterion

B5&

there are a number of refinemeii ts and ejLtensions of rlie cri ten on that al low it to be used for many uLhcr feedback systems as well For example, as we have develops it, the Nyquist plot can be drawn without any difficulties for stable or unstable C(j)//(j), as Jong as chere
are no poles of G{s)fJ{.^) exactly on the /oj-asi^. When such poles do oceur£ the value
of G( jiit)HiJto) is infinite at those points However, as considered in Pi£bleTTi 1 1 ,44, the Myquist criterion can be modified to allow for poles of G(s)H(s) on the jtij-axis. In addivioti, AS mentioned at tbe beginning of this section, the Nyquist criterion can also be e\tetided to the case in which G{s) and //(.5) are not rational For example, it can be shown that if the forward- and feedback-path systems are both stable, the Nyquist criterion is the same when the system furctions are nonrational as it is when che> are rational, Th&t h, the closed-loop system is stable if there are no net encirclements of the point -\IK^ Tb illustrate the application of the Nyquist criterion for nonrational system fjnctions, wc
present the following example:
Example ri.7

Consider the acoustic feedback example dlRCussed iti Section 1 1.2.6. RefeirinE to Fig-
^ ure 11. S(b), let - ^1^2 and

where wt have used the fact that e -/*' =^ -- 1. In this cajpC,

:if9o>

:il-9lP

-^ and as at varies from

tc TM, G(j<)j}H(Jii>) traces out a circle of r^iu^ 1 in the clock-

wise direction, with one full rcvoiution f&r every change of Itt/T in <*). This is illus-

liatiid in Figure 1 1.23. Since the forward- atid feedback-path systems aie stable [the

cascade G{x)H{s) is simply a time delay], ihe Nyquist stabihty mterion indicates thai
the closed-loop system will Isc stable jf aod only if - \/K does not fall inside die uni(

circk. Equivalently. weiequire for (.tabihty that

\K\< 1.

(11-92;

J"£|6C|aj)H(ja.)}

iH*{G(iw}H(!(u)i

Figure M.23 Hyquist plot bf Exainple M.7.

Since A!'i and K2 represent an acoustic gain and attenuation^ respectively, they arc both
positive, wVkich yitlds the stability enterion

K\K2 I-

(11,933

1

856

Linear Feedback Systems

Chap. 1

1 1 ,4,3 7?i Nyquist Criterion for Discrete-Time LTl Feedback Systems
As in the continuous-time case, the Nyquist stability criterion for discrete- time systems
IS based on the fact thai the difference in the nami:>er of poles and ieros inside a contour, for a rational function, can be determined by examining a plot of the value of the function along the contour. The difference bet^*'een the continuous -time and discrete-time cases is the choice of the contour. For the discrete-time case, stability of the closed-loop feedback system requires that no zeros of

R{z)= -^ + G(:)//U)

(11.^4)

Ue outside the unit circle.
Recall that the encirclement property relates to poles and leros inside any specified
conLour. On the other hand, in examining the stability of a discrete-time system, we are concerned widi the zeros of R{z} outside the unit circle. Therefore, in order to make uie of the encirclement property, we first make a simple modification, i^^tus consider the rational
function

kit} = r{-]

0195)

obtained by replacing z by iLs reciprocal. As seen in Problem 10.43, if ztj is a iero (pole)

> of fi{z)i then Vzo is a zero (pole) of Riz)- Since 1/ 1^| is less than I if l^ii^l

1, any zero

or pole of R{z) out-^ide the unit circle corresponds to a zero or pole of ^(_z) in^^ide the unit

circle.

From the basic encirclennent property, we know that as z traverses the unit circle in

a clockwise direction, the net number of clockwise encirclements of the origin by ^iz) equals die difference between the number of its zeros and poles inside the unit circle.

However, from the previous paragraph, this equals the difference between the number of
zeros and poles of R{z) outside the unit circle. Furthermore, on tha unit circle, z - e^'"
andl/^ - e"-'". Therefore,

R{e^n - R{e-'^y

(1L96)

From this, we ^e that evaluating R{z) as z traverses the unit circle in the clockwise di-
rection is identical to evaluating R{z) as z traverses the unit circle in the coimtercloih^ise direction. In sum, then.

The number of clockwise
encirclementfi of the origin
by the plot of if(f/-) as die
unit circle is traversed in the counterclockwise direction
(e,g,, as ^ increases from
to 2:r)

^^ number of zeros of R(^)

=

'^^^^'^^ ^"^ ^"^^ ^^^'^ TM'^^^
^ '^^"'^^ '^P^^^' ^^^^-*

"^^"^'^^ "-^^ ^"^* "^^^^

(1 1 97)

Much as in the continuous-time case, counting the encirclements of the origin by R{e^^) is equivalent to counting the number of encirclements of the point --\fK by the

Sec. 1 1.4

Trte ^tyquJSt Stabtlity Cnterlor

857

plot of G{eJ*^)H{^''^h again referred to as the Nyquist plot, which is graphed as oi varies

from Eo Itr. Also, the poles of R(z} are precisely the poles of G{z)^iz)* and the zeros of

H{z) are the closed-loop poJes. Therefore, theenctrclement property seated in th* preceding

paragraph implies thai the net number of clockwise encirclements by the Nyquist plot of

UK -- the poiui

equals the number of closed-loop poles outsi<ie the unit circle minus ^e

number of poles ofG{z)^{z) outside ibe unit circle. In order that the closed-loop system be

stable, we require noolosed-looppoks outside the unitcircle. This yields the discrete-time

Nyquist stability criterion:

Discrete-Time rSyquiiSt Stability Criterion: For the closed-loop system to be sta-
ble, the net tiumber of i:lockwixe encirclements of the point - l/K by the.NyquisT plot t)f 0{f^'^)H{e''^) a& ii} varie"> from to lir must equal mmus the number tif poles of
G{z)Hiz) that lie outside the anit circle. Equivalently* the net number of courtt^rt lockwise encirclements of the pt>int -1/^ by the Nyquist plot of G<tr^*')W(e'^) a^ cu varies from fj to 2iT must ei^uaf the number of pules of Giz}fi(z) outside the unit circle

Exampfe 1 T.S

(JU\fHz} = l + ^z

1
:(;+^)

(n.9R>

The Nyquist plot of this curve i!> shown in Figure 11.34. Since G{?]Hizi has nc. polea

outyide the UQit circle, tor the stability of fhe closed-loop system thert: must he no encir-

clcTnenl^ ol the point - 1/A'. From the figure, we see that this will be the case either if

-MK -\fK < L onl

>2.Thus. ihe iystemis stable ffir -172 <r K ^^ ]

Eim{Gte("}H^ei^M

1^.-0, 2t

<ttiF{Gte5"-''')H(ei-^',}

Figure 1 1 .24 Nyquist plot foe E^mple 11.8 The arrovj On the curvt in-
dicates the directiort in which thf curwe is traversed as co increases frorr
t0 27r.
Just as in contjnijoui lime, if the forward and feedback paths are stabb. then the
Nyquist plot can be nbtained from the frequency responses HU^"^) and GU^") of these

.

8S8

Linear Feedback Syslems

Chap. 1t

systems. If the forward and feedback paths are unstable, then the frequency responses are notdefiiied- Neverthele^ss, the Junction C(7}H{z) can still be evaluated on the unit circle, and the Nyqutst stabihty criterion can be applied.
As we have seen in this section, the Nyquist stability critenon provides a useful methed for determining the range of values of the gain A' for which a continuous-time
or discrete-time feedback is stable Cor unstable). This criterion and che root-locus meihixl are extremely important tools in the design and implementation of feedback systems, aniJ
each has its own uses and Limitations F^ir example, the Nyquist criterion can be applied to nonrationai system functions, whereas the root-locus method eannot. On the other hand,
root-locus plots allow us to examine not only stability, but also other charaeteristie.s tif the closed-loop system response, such as damping, oscillation frequency, and so on, which are readily identifiable from the location of the poles of the closed-Joop system. In the next section, we introduce an additional tool for the analysis of feedback systems that highlights another important characteristic of dofjcd-loop system behavior

1 1 .5 GAIN AND PHASE MARGINS

En this section, we intreduce and examine the t:ontept of the margin ojsfttbitifv in a feed-

back system. It is often of interest not only to know whi^rhir a feedbaL-k system is stable,

but also to deteftnlne how much the gain in the system can be perturbed and how muL-h

additional phase shift can be added to the system before it becomes unstable. Information

such as this Is important because in many applications the forward and feedback system

functions are known only approximately or may change slightly during operation bet-MUse

of wear, the effect of high temperatures on components, or similar influences

As an example, consider the telescope-pointing system described in SeLtion i 10

and illustrated in Figures l],l(c)ajid (d>. This systemc^msistsof a motor, a potentiometer

converting the shaft angie ta a vfiltage, and an amplifier that is used lo amplify tne voltage

repnisenting the difference between the desired and the actual shaft angles. Assuming that
we have obtained approximate descriptions of each of these tompments, we can set the

amplifier gain so that the system will be stable if these descriptions are accurate. However,

the ampUJier gain and the constant of proportionality that describes the angle- voltage char-

acteristic of the potentiometer are never known exactly, and therefi^re, the actual gain in

the feedback system may differ from the nominal value assumed in designing the system

Furthermore, the damping characteristics of the motor cannot be detennined with absolute

precision, and thus, the actual time constant of the motoi response may differ from the ap-

proximate value in the specificat3on of the system. For extimple. if the actual jt^otor lime

constant is laiger than the nominal value used in the design, the motor will respond more

sluggishly than anticipated, thereby producing an effective rime delay in the feedback

system ,

As

we

have

d iscus ied

in e arl ier c hapters ,

and

as

we

wi11

agai n

ni

bxa mplc

L 1

11

time delays have the effect of Increasing the negative phase in the frequency response of a

system, and this phase shift can have a destabilizing mfluence on the system. Because of

the possible presence of gain and phase errois such as. those we have just described, it is
-- clearly desirable to set the amplifier gam so tnat there is some maigm hn error that is. so

that the actual system will remain stable even if it differs somewhat from ihe approximate
m model used the design process.

1

1

Sec "1.5

Gam and Phase Margins

as 9

In this secLion, we introduce one method for quantifying the margin of stability in a feedback system To do this, we consider ii closed-loop system, depicted in Hgure 1 1 25. that has been designed to be stable based on nominal values for the forward- and feedback-
path system functions. For our discussion here, we let A/(s) and G{s) denote these notmnal
values. Also, since ihe basic concepts iire identical for both continuous-time and discrete-
titne systems, we will again focus our development on rhe continuous-time case, and at the
end of the section we illustrate the application of these ideas to a discrete-titne example.

x{li

o

M(s)

vfi)

j(S)

Figure I L25 Typical feedback
system designed to be stablCn assurming nominal descriptions for H{s] and Gis).

To assess tlie margin of stability in out feedback systenfi, suppose that the actual
system is as depicted in Figure 1 1 .26, where we have allowed for the possibility of a gain
K ^ and phase shift 4> in the feedback path. In the nominal system is unity and is /.erti, but
in the actual system cither or both may iiave a different value. Therefore, it is of intcreit to know how much variation can be tolerated in these quiiiities withtiul losing closed-lmip
system stsbility In particular, the gain margin of the feedback system is defined liS the
minimum amount of additional gain K, with 4* = 0, that is required so that the closed-
loop system becomes unstable. Similarly, the phaie margin is the additional amount of
K pha^e shift, with =^ \^ thai ij> required for the system to be unstable. By convention, the
phase murgin Ik expressed as a positive quantity; that is, it equals the magnitude of tlie
lidditional negative phase shift at which the feedback system becomes un^itable.

¨:t)

o

Hfs) .

^V[t)

G^s) -

Figure 1 ,2b F^edb^ck system containing possrble gain and phase deviations from the nominal description depicted in Figure 11.25

Since the closed-kwp system of Figure 1 25 is stable^ the sys£tem of Figure i -. 26
K can become unstable if, as ai^d 4> are varied, at least one pole of the closed-loop system

m ^ crosses the ^w-axis. Ir^ a pole of the closed-loop system is on the /w-axis at, say^

Èi>|>,

then at thi^ frequency

1 +^^-^*r;(>,,|H(M^)-o.

01.99)

860

Linear Feedback Systems

Chap. 11

or

Ke~^'^G(joaii)Hljiao] = -1.

(11.100)

Note that with A^ = I and^ = 0, by our assumptLon of stability for the nominal feedback
system of Figure 1L25, there is no value of too for which eq. (ll.iOO^ is satisfied. The
> gain margin of this system is the minimum value of ^ I fgr which eq. (H.lOO) has a K solution for some wo with 4* = 0, That is, the gain margin is the smallest value of for
which the eqi:aiion

KG{jwo)iiUcj{^) = -y

(II. ion

ha> a sclmion wq. Similarly^ the phase margin is the minimum value of <!> for which

K eq (11 .100) has a solution for some w^ when - 1 . Tn other w^ords, the phase margin is

> the smallest vaJue of <^

for which the equation

,>~^'^Clj(Ou}M[jon^) ^ -\

(11.102)

ha^ a solution.
To illustrate the calculation and gmphit:a] inteTpretation of gain and phase margins, we t:onKLder the following example.

Example 1 1 .9

ut

Ga)Ifh) =

4(1 + Is)

-

^

.?<i -^ 2s)il ^ n05v +(t).12Sjr)

(U.UM)

The BcxJe plfit for thi!> example is shown in Figure 11.27. Nofc thai. ;is di^tussed in

Problem 63\. the fack>T tjf l/;<£ in G{jtjj)H{jo}) contributes -<i\T ( -ttIZ r;iJi^ns) of

phase shift and a 20-dB-per-decEide increase in \Ci{jtii\H{jiti)\. T" Jotennine the gain

margin, we rthscrv*; ihal, with ct = 0. the only frequency ax whith eq. ( 1 1.101 ) can be

= fialistitd ii that for which <G(Jii>^)]-Hijai.i't

-tt. At this, frequency, the ^aiii mar-

We pin in decibels can be identified by irispctlion of Figure 11. 27

fir.st exajmne Filf.

ure [1.27(b) lo determine the frequLnty *y| at which (he angle curve crosses the line

-17 radians. Locating the pf>int at (his same frequency in Figure M 27(a) providc-s us

withthe value of |G(_/(U|)H{ja>i)|. t-.ireq. ill.iU"l)Tob5 satisiiedfortiJij = nf , A must equa] l/|<j(;iij|)f/(jÈij| )|. Thiwalut is the gam margin. As illustracedt a Figure 1 1 27(ii),

the gaii^ margiii esiprL-sscd in decibels can be id-entihed as the amount iJic kij^-Tiia^nitudt

OdB curve would have ir> be shifted up so ihat the curve intersects the

iini.- ji <h<t fre-

quency ftj|

In a SLttiilar fashiijn, we can detennine the phase margin. Note lirsl ihat ihe only frequent'y M which eq. I llT02)canbe satisfied i^thal for which \GiJu>^^)HiJw^l)^ - 1,

or L:Luivalen(]y, 2U log^ |G(>tJo)//(/ii>n}| = t>. lo determine the phc.se margin, we first

find the frequency tu: in Figure II 27(a) ai which the log-magnitude cuiA'e cros^i the

dti lin¨. Locating the point at this fi^mt frequency in Figure 11.27rb^ then pnfviJcs
us with Ihe value of ^rGjjtoa)/' (/'f 2) ^V>^cq. (11. 102 J to t>e sansfied foraj,, - u*., the
i angle of the left-hand side of [his equation must be -it. The value of for which ihis

ib true It the phase margin. A^ illgstruted in Figure II 27(b), the phusL: Tnar^]n can be

identified as the amount the jingle eurve would have to be lowered so ihat ihn curve intersects the htie - tt at the frequenvy a>:.

Sec. ^ 1 5

Gain and Phase Margins
40
3 20 ^
k.,-I.
DdB
(^
D -^Ti -
^ o
<.M -40 -
-60

861

1

1

-- "T

-.

^^

Gair rrargfn

iii2
/
1
O.f

i\
\ \i, 1.0 1 (ti

--
-
1
10.0

J

1

d

g

3

L

V

Ftiase margin

1
"^\

-TT -

1

[iVh ^1

\

2

0/

1.C

1
^
10.0

Figure 1 1 .27 Use ot Bade plots to calculate gain and phase margins tcr the system of Exampla 1 1 9

In detennining gain and phase margins, it is not always of interest to identify ex-
plicitly ^^frtquency at which the poles will cross the jw-axis. As an alternative, we can
identify the gain and phase margins from a log magnitude -phase diagram. For example, the log magnitude-phase diagram for the system of Figure 1 i.27 is shown in Figure 1 1 .28. In this figure, we plot 20 logio \Oijto}Hiju>)\ versus <G{jtif)H{jii}) as f* varies from to +", Therefore, because of the conjugate symmetry of G(;a£)//(joj>, the pbt contains the same information as the Nyquist plot, in which {R^G(jtj)//<yci>)} is plotted versus
&m{GiJi())H(jui)} for -oo < Èt> < ¨, As we have indicated, the phase margin can be read
off by locating the intersection of the log magnitude-phase plot with the 0-dB line. That is, Che phase margin is the aniount of additional negative phase shift required to shift the log magnitude- phase curve so diat it intersects the 0-dB line with exactly lS(r (tt ra-
dians) of phase shift. Similarly, the gain margin U directly obtained from die intersec-
tion of the log magnitude-phase curve with the line --tt radians, and this represents the amount of additional gain needed so that the curve crosses the line - tt with a magnitude ofOdB.
The following examples provide several other elementary illustrations of log mag-
nitude-phase diagramsr

È62
40 f

1

Linear Feedback Systems

Chap, 1

<G<jQi)H{jij)
U Exartipfe 1
Le1

Figure 1 1.28 Log imgnrtudephas& piol ^or the system of E>:am-
pJ¨ 11.9.

OU}H(^) 7J+ r

> r 0,

(1L104)

:

1

1

20
^
^ OdB
3
-z^
a
e -20
o
CM
-40 -

1

'i

Phase margin

/^
i

1

-

-

-&0
-2'n

Sir

2

2

-i G(jt>)H(jw)

Figure 1 1.29 Log mag nrtude- phase plot for the firat-order system of Ex-
ample 11.10.

Sec, 1 1 b

Gam and Phase Margins

863

In this taie, wc obtain the Icig rnagnitude-phase plot depLcte^l in Figure 1 1 .29. This ha-s

a phase margin of tt, and sinte the curve does not intersect the line -tt, the system

has inAnite gain mmgin (i.e., we ;:an increa&e the gain as tituch as we ttte and maintain

stability). This is consistent with the conclusion that we can draw b> examining the

system dlustrated in Figure 113(Xa). In Figure 11 .3(XbX we have depicted the root locus

= > for this system with 4> H and Jf 0. From the figune^ it is evident ttiat the system is

stable for any positive value of K. In additioti, if /^ =

= 1 and <^

ir, so that e^"^

=

-I,

the closed-loop sys-tem function tor the nyst&m of Figure 1 1 .30(a} is 1/tt, which has a
pole at .i = 0, so thai the ,sysiem is unstable.

1^^

*fi)

' v^/_

1
TS+1

K

e-i*

(a)

1
t"
^ -t
(Jl,

Ffgure 1 1 .30 (a) First-order feedback system with possible gain and
f3hase variations in the feettbacl^ path; (b) root locus for this syst&m with
= 0, ^ > 0.

Example 11,11
Suppose we now considei the second-order sysiiem

ms) =

\

x^ +s-\-\'

= G(s)

1.

fJl.liJS)

The sy.siem//tj) has an undamped natural frequency of 1 acda damping ratio of 5. The log magnitude-phuseplot fortius system i^ i11u>itrat&d in figure 11.31. Again we have in
finite gain margin, but a phase margin of only ir/2, aince it can be shown by a straightforward calculation that |//(>i>)| = 1 fora> = 1, and at this frequency <H{jtii) = -^/2
We can now illustraLe the type of problem that can be solved using the concepts
iyf gain and phase margin.<s. Suppose that the feedback system specified by eq. (11 .105)
cannot be realized. Rather, some unavoidable time delay is mtmduced into ibe leedback

864

Linear Feedback Systems

Chap. 11

path. That i*.

GU) = e",

(J]J06)

wtiere T is the time dflay. What v/e wou]d like to know is how suia]] thit, delay inusl be
to ensure the stability of the closed-loop system.

40

n1

-!

1

20 _-

3
g OdB
,3

Phase margin
^
j/^^ tu^l

^ -20
/
-40 -

-60
-air

J

1

3ic

-TT

2

<G(iut)H(j(o)

Figure 1 T.31 Log maflnltude-phwe plot for Uie second-order system of Example 11.11.

The first point to note is that

- j^--^"|

I,

(11,107)

so ^he delay doe& not chi^gelhe magnitude of H{jti>yG{jt/>). On ihe other hanU.

<^-^'"' ^ -wT radians.

(ILmS)

Tlius, every point on the curve in Figure 11.31 is shifted to the left. The amount of the shift IS pmportjnnai to the value of tit for each point iyn the log magnitude -phase curve
Froim this discu^ion, vc see that instability will occur ortce the phase mirgin ls reduced to zero, and this will happen when the pha^^e shift introduced hy the delay is equal to --tt/I at a> = 1. That is, the critical value t' of the liiiie delay satisfies

- -T = -^.

(11.109)

^ or (assuming that the units of are radians/second)
t' =^ 1.57 seconds.
Thus, for any time delay t < t\ the system remains stable.

(UJIO)

ExampJe f 1.12
Consider again the acoustic feedback system discussed in Section II. 2,6 and Exam-
< ple 1 1 7. Here, we assume that the system (£f Figure II .8 has been designed with K] K2 K so that (he closed-loop system is iitable. In thi^ case, the log magnitude-phase plot for

1

Sec. 1 1 .5

Gairf and Phase Margins

40 r

665

20 -
_3

3

dS

2_ 20log,o(K,KÈ) ^

-20
IN

Gain rrargin
*T

\ tii^O

-40

4tt

-3Tf

-2Tf

-IT

<e(jw)H{jci3)

Figure 1 1.32 Log magnitude -phase plot far Example 11.12.

f GisWis) = Ki JT^E

^^""^ is illustrated in Figure 1 i .32. From the figure, we see that the

system has infinite phase margin and a gain margin in decibels of -20 logirj iKiK2) <i.e,,

this is precisely the gain factor that, when multiplied by K] K2. equals I).

Ah in<lioat¨d at the stM of the section, the dehnitiQ(ns of the gain and phase mai^in

are the same for discrete-time feedback systems as for continuous-time systems. Specifi-

cally, if we have a stable dhcrete-time feedback system, the gain margin is the minimum

amount of additional gain required in the feedback system such that the closed-Loop sys-

tem becomes unstable. Similarly, the phase raargin is the minimum amount of additional

negative phase shift required for the feedback system tc be unstable. Hie following e:t-

ample illustrates the graphical calculation of phase and gain margins for a discrete-time

feedback syjjtern; the procedure iji esjjcntially the same as for oontinuou!i-lime systems.

Exampfe 1 f.f 3
In this example, we illustrate the concept of gain and phase margin for the disrrrete-lime
feedback system shown, in Figure 11 .33. Here,

K and by direcl calculation we tan check that the feedback systean is stable hi - i
and <^ = 0. In Figure 11.34, we have displayed the Log magnitude-phase diagram for

x|n]

ñ+Lr^J

L

1
^-Ë-'^g- =

-y[n]

^ ^-1*

K

Figure 1 .33 Discrete-time ieedback system of Example it 13.

1

966
40

l-irtear Feedback Systems

Chap. 1

* 20

o OcB - -

Phase margin = 0685 rad

Gain margin = 1 .68dB

20 2tt

3:0-
2
^Gfe^-IHCe''"!

Figure I r-34 Log magtiikde-phas6 diagram br the discrete-time feedback system of Example 11.13.

ihe sysieniL that is, we have ploncd 20 bgio /0'{^""'}/f(f "^)| ver\us -> Gff "")W(f ''^) Jis
fi) varies from to 2'J7- The &y<itein ha>. a g^in margin of" 1 .68 dB bind a phase margin of
0-nft85 radians [3.y?"£.

In contluding this section, it should be stressed rbat the gain margin is The minimum value of gain that moves one or mort of the closcd-lfMjp pules ontw the /iu-ax:s in ojminucms tTMe OT the unU circle in dv^trete lime and, consequently, causes the system to bectmie
unstable. It is important to note, ho^vever Xhai this does rtot imply tha: the Nvsterri is un
sLable Kir aU valutis. of gain above the value specified by the gain n^aryin. Ftir example,
K ai illustrated in Problem I J 47, as increases, the root locus may mr>ve from the left- half
plane into the right' half plane and thenerfsss baLkinto the kft-half plane. The gain margin provides us with the information about how much the gain can be increased until the poles first reach the yw-axis, but it tells us nothing :ibout the possibility thai the sy^teir may again be stahle foi even larger values of the gain. To obtain such inf^>rTrtation, \^e must CLthei refer to the txjot locus or use the Nycjuist stabiliry criterion. (Sec Problem 1 1.47.).""

1 1 ,6 SUMMARY

In this chapter, we have cxamineJ a riumber nf the applieatiL>ns and several lechrnqties for
Lhe analysis (if feedback systems. We have seen how the use of Laplace and ^-tran^forms

allows as to inaly^e these sysleiMS a.tgebraicany and graphically

we In Set:tion 11 .2

it^-

dicated several of the applieatjons of feedback, including tiie design of inverse systems,

"Fnr detailed discnis-ioii'^ orthns p).j][it tiod Lhv <sf emn and phass margin-i and l^lg ma^mtuce-pha-^e
(Jirtj^aitiMngeiktral, ^L-t The ti:>;is(>n feedback; li-^tetJ in the bibllugrdpNy dC [he end uf thi' Dcujfc.

Chap- 11

Problems

S67

the stabilization of unstable systems, and the design of tracking systems. Wc also saw that
feedback tian destabilize, as well as stabilize, a system.
In Section 1 1 .3, we described the rool-locus method for plotting the poles of the closed-loop system as a function of ti gain parameter Here, we found that the geometric
evaluation of the phase of a rational Laplace transform or ^-transform allowed us to gain a significant amount of insight into the properties yf the root locus. These properties often permi; us to obtain a reasonably accurate sketch of the root locus without performing complex calculations
In contrast in the ront-locu'^ method, the Nyquist criterion of Section 1 1,4 is a technique for determining the stability of a feedback system, again as a function of a variable
gain, without obtaining a detailed description of the location of the closed-loop poles. The Nyquist criterion is applicable to uonratiotial system functions and thus can be used when
all that is available are expcrimcmally determined frequency responses. TTie sajne is true of the gain and phase margins described in Section 1 1 ,5, These quantities pmvide a measure i)f the margin t)f stability in a feedback isysiem and therefore are of imporrance to design-
ers in that they allow them to determine how robust a feedback system is To discrepancies
between estimates of the forward- and feedback-path system function*; and their actual
values.

Chapter I 1 Problems
The first section of problems belongs to the basic category, and the answers are provided in the back of the book. The remaining three sections contain problems belonging to the basic, advanced, and extension categories, respectively.
BASIC PROBLEMS WITH ANSWERS
11h1£ Consider the interconnection of discrete-time LTl systems shown in Figure PI 1.1.
H?:press the overall system function for this interconnection in terms of Mf^iz),

Hn(z)

Mnj

J^

Hi(i)

;(G>

y|r>]

G{i]
Figure PI I.l

1

a6B

Linear FeetJback Systems

Chap, n

n.2£ Consider ihe mterconnection of discreu-time LT! systems shown in Figure PH. 2.
Express the overall system fund ion for this interconntctioTi in terms of H\is).

Ktt)

,Y'V ^ ^M

^r"V

^M

y(t)

--

^

,

f Gi(si

----ñ

laj^SJ

FtgLtre PM^Z

11*3£ Consider ihe t<7ntiniJous-time feedback system depicted in Figure 1 J ,3(a) with

fi(s) -

1

J- I

Eind

G(j>

=

- 5

È>.

For what real values ofb Ls the feedback system stable?
A 11*4. causai LTI s^ystem S with input jcU) and output v(0 is represented by the dift'er-
ential equation

S is to be implemented using the feedback configmaiion of Figure ^,3(a^ with
His) - ^ \I{i- 1>. Determine GCO-
1L5, Consider the discrete-time feedb^olc system depicted in Figure II 3fb} with

aniJ

G{z) =

\-bz

-\
\

For what rea^ values t>f h is the feedback system stabiC? U.6. Ctinsidei the diiiE;rete-timc feedback system depicted in Figure 1 1 .3(bJ with
Hiz) - 1 -;'" ^d Giz)= -p4^'

Is this system IIR or FIR'^ \\J. Suppose the closed-loop poles of a feedback system satisfy

I

1

K U^e the root-locus method to deterniine the values of for which the feedback
system is guaranteed to be stable.

Chap 11

Problems

969

11,8. Suppose the (;losed-lcwp poles of a feedback system satisfy

- A

]

1

(i-+ ^)(s-\-2)

K

Use the rooi-locus method to determine the negative values of A' for which the feedback system is guaranteed to be stable. 11*9. Suppose the closed-loop ptjles of -a feedback system satisfy
(5+ 1)(j + 3) _ __!_
K + (s + 2)is 4) ~

Use the root-locus method to determine whether there are any values of the ad-
justable gain K for which the system's impulse response has an os^iillaiory compo-
nent of the form È~^''cos(wor + 0)> where wo ^ 0,
11.10* The root locos corresponding to G(JJ/f(j) = -- P 1/J^ is illustrated inFigure 11.1 0. In this figure, the start (A' - O)andendofeachbranchoftherootlocusare marked
by a '*' symbol. Specify ihe poles and zeros of C{s)H\s)^

K>0
^^ {H*

x<o
>
-1

at.
Figi^re PI 1 .1 D

870

Linear Feedisacfc Systems

Chap 11

ILII^ Suppose the closed-loop poles of a discrete-time feedback system satisfy

K Using the root-locus luethodH determine the positive values ol for which diii
system is stable,
= -- 11,12, Each of the four locations z = i/2, j 1/4,^ = 0, andz = Jj'2is asmgle-order
pole or 7Èro of G{x)^{l}^ Furthentiore, C{z)Hiz) is blown to have only two poles. What information can you deduce about the poles and ^en>s of G(z)fiiz) frooi the
fact thai for all K, the root locus corresponding to
G{lW(z) = -^
is on the red axis. 1L13* Comider the block diagram of Figure Pi 1.13 for a discceie-bme sysiein. Use the
^ root-locus method to dctenmine the values of for wtiich the system is guaranteed
to be ^able.
yln]
D
ˋ

Ffgure P] ],13

1L14. Let Cbe a closed path diat lieson the unitcirclein thep-plane and that is traversed
in the clockwj.se direction in. order to evaluate W{p)r For each of the following
expressions ftjr lV(p), determine the net number of times the plot of W(p} encircles

the origin ia aclocltwisedlreenoTi:

(a) W(p) =

ir-')

i.^--^!'

(b) W(p) =

0-2p ')

(t-|p ijiT :/J-'-4.T ^>

Chap 11

Problenns

871

11,15£ Consider a continuous-time feedback systein whose closed-loop poles satisfy

G(j)//(.i) -

1

(*+I)

1
K

Use the Njquist plot and the Nyquist stability criterion to deEcrtnine the range
[jf values of K for which the closed-loop system is stable. Hint: In sketching the Nyquist plot, you m^y find it ufieful to sketch [he corresponding Bode plot first. It
also ii helpful to determine the values oi"Èi> for which 0(j(t*)Mijvj) is real.
11.16. Consider a continuous -linie feedback system whose closed-loop poie.s satisfy

LT.se tile Nyquisf plot and the Nyquist stability critcnoti to determine the range of
K values of for which the closed-loop system h stable.
11.17. Consider a continiious-^me feedback system whose closed-loop poles iatiiify

Use the Nyquist plot and the Nyquist stability criterion to determine the range of
K h values of for which the closed-loop system stable.
IIAH. Consider a discrete-time feedback system whose closed-loop poles satisfy
Use the Nyquist plot and the Nyquist stability criterion to detentiine the range of values of iT for which the closed-loop system is stable.
11.19. Consider a feedback system, cither in continuous- tinie or diM;rete-time, and liup-
pose that the Nyquist plot for the system passes through ihe point -- UiT. Is the
feedback system stable or unstable fair this value of the gain? Explain your answer 11¨20¨ Consider the baste contiduous'titne feedback system of Figure 1 1.3(a). Deteimine
the phase and gain margin for the following specification of /f(j> and G(s):

BASIC PROBLEMS

11 ^1, Consider the feedback system of Figure P 11.21. Find the closed-loop poles and

zeros of this system for the following values of K:

K (i)

= OJ

K - (3i>

I

^ (iii>

=* 10

^ (iv>

- 100

1

87Z

Mt)

-O

Linear Feedback Systems

Chap. 1

*- v(t}

$+1 s+100

Figure Pi 1.21

11^2. Consider the basic feedback system of Figure 1 i .3{a>, Determine the closed- loop

system impulse response for eac;li &f the following "^peciftcations of the system

functions in ihe forward and feedback pattis:

(a) MU) =

, ouy = 1

(b>

H(s)-

I
jh'^^'^

^-vii

11.23. Consider the basic feedback systems of Figure 1 1 .3(b), Determine the closed-loop system impulse response for each of the following spet;ifications of rhe system functions in the forward and feedback paths:
(a) H(z) - Y^,G{z) = I" ^r^

K > 11.24. Sketch the root loci for

(a) G(s)H(s) = j^

(b) G{s}H{s\ =

'

(c) Gis^His) =

^ (d) Gis)ms} -
(e) G(!;)His) =
^^ (ft G(.)H(a; =

r-
and A" <

for each of the following:

(h> G(.)//(.0 = ^;fl^
^ ^ > 11.25, Sketch the root loci for (a) C(z)H(z] -

{b} G{i)H{z]\

L

and ^ <

for each of the following:

= (c)

G{z)H{z\ _

7-'i\+r') 1- ?

(d>

Giz)H{z)

=

-I z

.-2

(e) G(^)/:/(z) is the lystem function of the causal LTI system described by the

difference equation

y\n] - 2y\n. - 1] ^ j[n - I] - x[n - 21

Chaf3. 11

Probiet;i&

673

11.26, Consider a feedback system with

S^S^ -<'^-^^' =

K ^ Sketch the toot locus ior > and <

a= (a)

I, h = 2

(h) a = -Z

(d) a = "7, h ^ 2

(ei a ^ -1,

a= (g) a = -7. h = -2

(h)

-5,

(j) a

r h^ -8

for the following values of a and hi

h^ 2

- - (c) a

-4, ^ i>

2

b = -1 {() a = ~4. b ^ -1

h = -A^

(i) a = -1, h =- -4

11.27,. Consider a feedback system with

s -1-2
j^ + 2^ + 4

K > {k) Sketch the root lotus for

0.

^ < ib) Sketch the root locus For

fl.

(c) Find the smallest positive value of K for which the closed-loop impulse re-

sponse does not exhibit any oscillatory behavior.

1L28> Sketch the Nyquist plot for each of the following specifications of G{s)M{s), and

use the continuous- time Nyquist criterion to determine the range of values of A^ <if

any such range exists) for which the closed-loop system is stable. Note: In sketch-

ing the Nyquist plots, you may find it usefiil to sketch the corresponding Bode ploLs

^ firsL It also is helpful to determine the values of <t> for which G(;a>)//(jtu) h real.

<a) G(J)H(.) = ;J^

(b) Gis)His) =

^ (c) G{s)H(s) =
it) G{x)H(s) =

^ <f) Gis)ms) =

(g) 0{s)H{j!) =

(i> G\s)MU) =

= (k) G{s)f{(,^)

11.29. Consider the basic continuous-time feedback system of Figure 1 ! .3<a)- Sketch the log magnitude-phase diagram, and roughly determine the phase and gain margin,
for each of the following choices of G(j) and H(s). You may find it useful to use the straight-line approximations to the Bode plots developed in Chapter 6 to aid you in sketching the log magnitude-phase diagrams. Be careful* however, to take into account how the actual frequency response deviates from its approximation near break frequencies when diere are underdamped second-order terms present.
(See Section 6-5,2.)
(a) HU) - -^;;iÝ,GCv)- 1 (b) H{s) = ^i!Iii,GW- 1

674

Linaai^ Feedback 3y$1¨ms

C^ap- 11

Note: Your sketch for part (gj should reflect ihc fact that for this feedback
¨ -- sysLcTTi \G{jo?\H{j<a)\ --> as w * 0; what is the phase QfG{jvj)Hiji!i) for
w = ijj \ i.e., for an infinitesimal amount larger than 0?

11.30. Sketch the Nyquist plot for each of the foi^owing spec ifi cations of G(t)H{z\ and

use the discrete-time Nyquist criterion to tletermioe the range of values of /C <]f any

such range exists) for which the closed-loop system is stable. [A'^r^: In sketch-

ing the Nyquist plots, you may fitid it useful to first sketch the magnitude and

pha.se plots as a function of frequency or at least calculate \Gie^*^)H(e^'^\\ and

<G<**-'*')//(f'"^) ai several points. Also, it is helpful lo determine the values of oj

for which G(e^'")H{eJ'^) is real.]

(a) G(z)H{z) = zzT

<b) G{z)H{z) = - >

(c) C{z)HU) = r'

(d) G{z)H{z) - --2

^ (g) Gi7}H{z) = 3?-r7-r
(i> GizWU) =

^ <li) G(i)m_z) =

1131, Consider die basic discrete-time system in Figure 11. 3rb). Sketch the log magnitude-

phase diagram, and roughly determine the phase and gain margin, for each of the

foliowing choices of C<^) and ff(z). You may find it useful to determine the values
ofoj for which either |G(e>)//(È'>^)| = 1 or <C(eJ"> ^ -ir.

<a) mz) = z-\GU) = J

(b)

mz) -

-v-i.c(^) =

I

n%

{*

^, (d) //U) ^ 2 CU) ^ 1
(e) H{z) = :^.Giz) -

-- (g) ^iz) = ^,G(^) = 1
(h) //(z) = T^.Ca) = i^-'
(Not^: Your sketch for part (h) should reflect the fact that, foithis feedback system,
G(zWU)ha.^apoleat^ = 1; what at^ the values of <G(f^'^)//(tf^'^) for f''" just oneithersideof the point ^ = 1?)
ADVANCED PROBLEMS
11.32, (a) Considerthe feedback system of Figure nJO(b> with

,

Chap. 11

Problem$

B7S

Assume that there is no pole-zero caneellacion in the product GUW{&)^ Show
ihat the zeros of Che closed-loop system funcdott consist of the zeros oT M(s)
anU the poles of <3{s) (b) Use the result of part (a) logelKer with the appropriate property nf the root
^ lot.'us to confirm that, with Jf 0^ the closcd-lcwp system zeros are the zeros
of //<Ë> and the clo^d-loop poks are the poles (y( His). ic) Wliile it is usual for His) and Gis) in eq. (PI 1.32-1) to be in reduced form
[i.e., the polynomials A^i(j) and/>((j) have no COTitnton factors, and the same
IS true of Afifj) and D^O)], it may happen that N^is) and Diis) have common factors or t^ii^) and D^{&) have common factors. To see what occurs ivhen such common factors are present, let p{s) denote the greatest common factor
D U of N2{s ) atvd ] ) . That is.

pix)

pij)

are both polynomials and have no oommon factors, SiitiJlarly,

"h^ and ^1^

are polynomials and have no common factors. Show that the closed-form sys-
tem function can be written as

where

His)
qis) 1 + KG(s)His}

(Pll.?2-3)

^'^
DdsVgis) and

^ D2<^Vpisy
Therefore, from eq. (PI 1.32-^2) and part (aX we see that the zeros of Q{s) are
the zeros of p<s). the zeros of ^(j>, and the poles of G(s], while the poles of Qis) are the zeros of ^(j) and the solutions of^

1 +KGis)fi(s) = i).

(PI 1.32-3)

By construction, there is no pole-^ero cancellation in die product Gix)His),nnd

ihus^ we can apply the root-locus method described in Section 1 1.3 to sketch

K the locations of the solutions of eq, (PU.32-3) as is varied.

(d) Use the procedtu^ outlined in part (c) to delermine the closed-lix>p yerOK, any

closed-loop pole^ whose locations are independent of K. and the locus of the

> remaining closed-loop poles for ^

when

876

Linear Feedback Systems

Chap. 11

(e) Repeat part (d) for
m Let

r^
1 +J-'

^U) =

z^

a-2)(-:+ 2)"

> < (i) Sketch the root locus for A^

and for iST 0,

(ii) Find aU the values of ilT for which the overall syjitem is stable,
<iij) Find the impulse tespense of the closed-loop system when ^ = 4.

1 1 ,33. Consider the fnsedback system of figure 1 1 . 10(a), and suppose that

tn

ir- 1

m m where > n,^ In this case G(s)His) has ~ n polcA at infinity (see Chapter 9\

and we can adapt the TWJt-locus rules given in the text by noting that [1 > there are
m K branches of the root locus and (2) for ^ 0, all blanches of the root locus tjegin -- at pole^ of C(j)//<j), /n- rt of which are al infinity. Furthermore, as |A'| > ==, these

m branches convert to the zeros of G{iiH(sX namely, ^ , ^2v ^ ^m Use these

K > facts to assist you in sketching the root locus (for

and for A' < 0) for each

of the following:

(a) G(s)H(s) = s- ] {b) GU)H{s) = + {s [){s + 2)
(c) G(s)mi:) - ^^^^^

11.34. In Section 1 1 .3, we derived i. number of properties that can be of value in deter-

mining the root locus for a feedback: system. In this problem, we develop several

We additional properties.

derive these properties in terms of continuous-time sys-

tems, but, as with all root-locus properties, they hold as v^^ell for discrete-time root

loci. For our discussion of these properties, we refer to the basic equation satisfied

by the closed-loop poles, namely,

Gis)Hi^) = -^,

(PlU^^lt

m ^Kote LtiaL tot a Luniinuau^-ijm? system ^ the canditiun > n implies that the sysKm v/im iyitcm fum;'
(iur G(s)M(ji) invnives ditferentiauon of tlie input ([n fact, the inverse tr^iJunn of C<j)W(.0 inctudci smgu
m m larity fun^tiuna up lo tlie order - rt,] In discrete timci if G{z)f^U), written as a ratio of polynummJii. z, Ims m = H, it is necessanly tbc system tunctior) of a non::auÈal syslem. [In fact, the lover^e trans-fom o{(Jiz\fiiz\ m has n nonzcm value at dnne fl - < QJ Thi&H the t:ase considered in thii probkm is Eitiuaily nf intere^i only
forcraitiniJous-TJiTie systems.

Chap. 11

ProbJems

where

GU)M<s) =

= k

\

= ft

i

_ 1^=1

=

ft

i

877
(PI 1.34-2)

Figure PTK 34

Throughout this problem, we a^su^1e that m '^ n^
m (a) From Property 2, we know that n ~ branches of th& root locus go to ze-

ros of G{s)}i{s) located at Lnfiuity. in this first part, ^ve demonstrate that it is

straightforward to determine the angles at which these branches approach in

finity. Specifically, consider seaiching the remote part of the f-plane (i.e., the

region where |j| is extremely large and far from any of the poles and zeros of

G(j)/f(j)]. This region is illustrated in Figure Pll 34. Use the geometry of the

> < picture^ together with the angle criterioin for iC

and for JC 0, to deduce

^ m > * For

0, the n - branches of the root iocus that approach infinity do so

at the angles

(2jt+ 1)77
n--m

m- = - jt

0, I,..., W

1-

,

S7S

Linear Feedback Systems

Chap. 1 f

< m ñ For ff 0, the H - branches of the root jocg.s thai approach infinity do sq
at Che angles

--
n-m

= ^ m -- a:

n Q, 1, . . . ,

1.

Thus, the branches of the nxjt locus that approach infinity do so at spccifted angles

m ^ > that are arranged symirietrically. For example, for n --

=> 3 anJ

0, we stx

that the asymptotit angles are tt/B, it, and 5^/3 Th&iesuliirf part(a>, together with

ane additional fact, ^lows us to draw in the asymptotes for the branches of the root
m locus that approach infiiiity. Specifically, afl of the n -- asymptotes intersect at a

single point on the real axis, Tliis is derived in the nest part of the problem.

(b> (f) As a Hrst Atep, consider a get^eral polytiomjal equation

y U ^ + fr-^' ' + " + /O -

- &) - - ^[)(.^

(^ - - '

^r£

0.

Show th^t

(ii) Perform long division oti [/G{y)H{s) to write

Show that

FT

n

[See eq.<Pll.34-2).) (iii) Argue that the solution of eq. (Pi 1 ,34-1) for inr^e j is an approximate
solution of the equation

U^ (iv)

the results of (iMiii) tti deduce that the sum o(\ht n -- /tt closed- loop

poles that approach infinity is asymptcnically equal to

m Thus, thecenterof gravity of these n - poles is
n--m m which does not depend on K. Consequently, we have n -- closed-loop
poks that appro^tch 1^1 = ^ at evenly spaced angles and thai have ^ center
of gravity that h ii>dependent ofK, From this, we Odn deduce that:

n Chap,

Pratjlems

879

The asymptotes of the a -- m branches of the root locus that approach

infmity intersect at the point

n

m

Pfll-I ~ 0/1-1
n-m

k=\

k= I

n-m

> This point of intersection of the asymptotes is the same for A^

and

(c) Suppose th^c

GU)H(s) =

1

(s^ l)(j + 3)(j + 5)'

(l> What are tbe asymptotic angles for tSkt closed-loop poles thai approach

> < infmity for AT

and for i!: 0?

(ii^ What is the point of intersection of the asymptotes?

(iii) Draw in the fisymptotes^ and use them to hdp you sketch the mot locus.

for/:>OaiidforA^<0.

(d) Repeat part (c) for each of the fD] towing:

(i) Ci,)HU) = ;^j^^

(ii) G(s)H(s} = ^

(iii)

Gisms) ^

1

,^,,^,_,^,,,,

(iv) G(s)M(s) ^ ^rnp^

(vi) Gis)HU) ^ ,^,,/X^,,,

(vil) G(s)ms) =

JVl

(f+iooKj-iXa-^}

(e> Use the result of part (a) to explain why the folic*wing statement is tnie: For

any continMOus-time feedback system, with G{s)H{s) given by eq. (P 1 1 .34-
m - 2), if rt ^ 3, we can make the closed-loop system unstable by choosing

\K\ large enough.

(f) Repeat part (c) for the discrete-lime feedback system specified by

G{z)H{z) =

(g> Explain why Ae following statement is true: For any discrete -time feedback
system with

> if n m, we can make the closed-loop system unstable by choosing \K\ Large
enough.
11^5. (a) Cotfesider again the feedback system of Example 11.2:
+ (j -I- l)(j 2)

1

BEO

Linear Feedback Sv^tems

Chap. 1

K The root locus for <(} is plotted in Figure 1 L 14Cb}. For some vaiue of K, K the closed- loop pcles are on the jCLi-axis, t>etennine this value of and ihe
corresponding locations of the closed-loop poles by examining the real and
iTnagijiary parts t>f ^e equation

which must be satisfied if the point s = joj is on the toot locus for any given
values of A". Use this refiult plus the analysis in Example 1 1.2 to tind the full range of values of iT {positive and negative) for which the closed-loop system
is stahle.
(b) Note that the feedback system in unstable for \K\ sufficienrly larige. Explam why this is true in general for continuous-time feedback systems for which G[s)H(<t) has a zero in the right- half plane and for discreie-ntne feedback systems for which G(z)H(z) has a zero outside the unit circle.
11.36p Consider a oontinuous-time feedback system with

-----1__ 0(^s)His} - s(s + \)is + 2)

(PI 1.315-1)

> < (a) Sketch the root locus for AT

and for if O. (Hint: The resuUs of Problem

11,34 are useful here.)

^ > (b) If you have sketched the locus corrsctly, yog will see that for

0, two

branches of the root locus cross the jw-axis, parsing from the lefl-half plane

into the right-half plane. Consequently, we can conclude that the closed-loop

< < system is stable for

iT ^o, where A'q is the value of the gain for which

the two branches of the root locus intersect the jTit-axis. Note that the sketch

of the root locus does not by itself tell us what the value of ATd is or the exact

point on the jui-axis where the branches ciosSk As in Problem 11.35, determitw Kfi by solving the pair of equations obtained as the real and imaginary

parts of

Giji^ymjio) = --Jr.

(P11.36-2>

Etetermine the corresponding two values of a* (which are the negatives of each

other, since poles occur in complex-conjugate pairs).

Front your root-locus sketches in part (a)t note chat there is a segment

of the real axis between two poles which is on the nuot locus for /f > 0, and

K < a different segment is on the locus for

0. In both cases, the root lociis

breaks off from the real axis at some point In the next part of this problem, we illustrate how one can calculate these breakaway points.

(c) Consider the equation denoting the closed-loop poles:

Gis)H{s) = -l^

(PlL3t^3)

Chap. 11

Protlems

&ei

!t>)

Figure PTK36

Using eq. (Pn.36-- U, ihow that an equivalent equation for ihe closed loop

poles is

pU) = i^ + 3.r + 2s = -K.

<PU36-4^

CoTisider the stJgmeiiL of the real axis between

and

I.

This

segment

is

on

^ the root locus for A'

Q. For A' = 0, two branches of the locus begin at and

K h - 1 and approach each other as

increaseci.

(i) Use the facts staled, toget^ier with eq. (PU36-4), lo explain why the

^ -- function pis) has the form shown in Figure PI 1 ,36(a> for 1

s^

and svhy the poiiai s^ M^ber^ the minimum occurs i& the breakaway point

> (i.e., it tÈ the point where the two branches of the JT

locus break from

the segment of the real axis between --I and 0).

K <0 Similarly, consider the root locus far

and, more specifically,

-- the segment of the real axis bejween 1 and TM 2 that is part of this locus.

K For K = 0, two branches of the root locus begin at - 1 and -2. and as

i& decreased, these poles approach each other.

(ii) In an analogous fashion to that used in part (i)^ explain why the function

p(s) has th& form shown in Figure PI 1 36(b) and why the point s- where
K the maximum occurs is the breakaway point for < 0.
Thus, the breakaway points conespond to tfie the maxima and min-

ima of p{s} as J ranges over d*e negative real line,
(iii) The points at which pis) has a maximum or minimum are the solution^

of the equation

dpia) = i}.
ds

Use this fact to find the breakaway points Sf and s-, and then use eq. (PnH36-4no find the gains at which these points are closed-loop poles.

In addition to the methcx) il^usu^ied in part icX there are other, partially
analytical, partially graphical methods for determining breakaway points. It is ^so possible to use a procedure similar to the one just illustrated in pan (c) to find the

1

882

Linear feedback Systems

Chap. 11

'"bre^ik-in" points, where two branches of the root l[x:us merge onto the real asis, Thc&c methods plus the one lUuslxated arc described in advanced lexts such ^^ those listed in the bibliography at the end of the bock.
ll£37£ One issue that must always be taken into account by the system designer is the
pt>Ksible effect ufunrtiodeled aspects of the sy^tern one is attempting to siahilL^ nr
modify throi}gh feedback. In this problem, we provide at^ illustration of why this
is the case, Ctmsider a continuous-tiine feodback system, and suppose that

- //l.s>

;

-^-

(Pn.37-h

an(^

Gis) = K.

(PI 1.37-2)

(n) L^se root-^ocus techniques to show thai the closed-loop system will be stable if
K is ohysen large enougb.
(b) Suppose that the system we are trying to stabilise by feedback ai:TualI\ has a
system function

The added factor can be thought of as representing a first-order system in cascade with the system of eq. (PI 1.37-1 ). Note that the time constant of the added first order system is extremely stnalL and thus will appear to have a step
response that is almost instantaneous. For this reason, one often neglects such factors iri order to (obtain simpler and more tractable models that capture all of the important characteristics of the system. However, one must still keep these
neglected dynamics in mind in obtaining a useful feedback design. To see wh^ this is the case, show that if Gis) is given by eq <P 1 31-2} and H{s) is as in
eq. (PI 1.37-3), then the dosed-loop system will be unstable if /Tis chosen too
large. Hint: See Problem U. 34. (c) Use naoi-locus techniques to show that if

KU G\^\ =

+ 100),

K iben the feedback system will be stable for all values of sufficiently large it
ms) is given by eq. (PU.37-1) or ^. (Pi L.37-3).
11.38, Consider the feedback system of Figure ] l,3{b> with

and

- \

z^

G{i).^ \ -az-^.
> (a> Sketch the root ]qcv^ for K" and ^ < when a - \/2.
(b> Repeat part (&} when a ~ - 1/2,

Chap 11

Problems

A63

(c) With ii = -- 1/2, find a value of A' for which the closed-loop impulse response
is flf the farm
iA 4 Bn)a"
for some valu&s of the consiants ^, B, and a, with \a\< 1. {Hint: What must
the denomimiLor of the closed-loop system function look like in this case?)
1139. Consider the feedback systeni of Figure PI 1 39 with

H{z) =

1

- J^ I'

i

G{z) = K.

(Pll.39-])

x[n]

^ en

H|z)

^m

GU)

Figure P1 1.39

K > (a) Plot the root locus for

0.

K <b) Plot the root kjtiis for <0. {Note: Be cureful with this niot locus By ap-

K plying the angle criterion on the real axis, you will find that as Is decreased

+^ from zero, the closed loop approaches z =

along the positive real axis and

then returns along the negative real a?(is from z = -^r Check that this is in

tact the case by expliciil)' solving for the closed-loop pole as a functii>n of K.
K At what value of is the pole at ;| = ^7) |
^ {c) Find the full range of values of for whitb the closed-loop system is stable,

(d) The phenomenon observed in part (b> is a direct consequence of the fact that

in this example the numerator and denominator of G<z>//(c) have the same
degree. When this occurs in a discrete-time feedback system, it means that

there is a delay- free loop in the system. That is£ the output at a ^iven point in

time is being fed back into the system and in turn affects it5 own value at the same point in lime. To see that this is the case in the system we are considering

here, write the difference equation relating v(rtl and f\n]. Then write e[ri] in

terms of the input and output for the feedback system. Contrast this result with

that of the feedback system with

1
ffiz)^
J-!

K Giz) =

-I

(P 11.39-2)

The primary consequence of having delay-free loops is that such feedback sysiems cannot be implemented in the form depicted. For example,
for the system of eq. (Pn.39^1), we cannot first calculate e\n] and then y[n],

1
.

684

Linear Feedback Systems

Chip. 1

because e[n] depends on y\n\. Note that we tan perform (his type of caJculatioo for the system of eq. (PI 1 .39-2)^ since e[n] depends on y[n - 1]. (e) Show that the feedback system of eq. (PI 139-1) represents a causa] system,
K except ftir the value of for which the closed-loop pole is &t \z\ = ^-.
11.40. Consider the discrete-fimc feedback system depicted in Figure PI 1.40. The system in the forward path is not very well damped, and we would like to choose the feedback systenfi function so as to improve the overall danfiping. By using the rootlocus method, shov that this can be done with
G(z) = 1- ^z '.

<U T
^ 8 ^ ^ 64

*- y[nl

G(;)

Figure PI 1.40

K > Specifically, sketch the root locus for

i), ajid specify the value of the gaiti fC

for which a sjgnificant improvement in daitiping is obtained.

11 Al. (a) Consider a feedback system with

H{z) =

z+ 1

z^ ^z ^ y

C'i'z-) - -- 1'

(i) Write the closed-loop system function explicitly as a ratio of two polynomials. (The denomitiator polynomial will have coefficients that depend onK.)
(ii) Show that the sum of the closed- loop poles is mdepeodent of A;, (b) More generally consider a feedback systetn with system function

+ K = Giz)H{z)

^'" +&,.-(;:'"-' +

-^iM

z" +d;,-ir^''

+00

Show that if IB ^ n - 2, the sum of th* closed-loop poles is independent of K.
11A2. Consider again the discrete-Eiire feedback system of Example 1 1.3:

G{z)H(z) =
iz-b2 /iv"z-^4y

> < The root loci for A^

and A'

are depicted in Figure 11.16.

)

Ch5p 11

Problems

SS5

K (a) Consider the root locus for > i). In this case, the system becomes un.^tsble

when one of the

closed-loop poles

is

le?*s

than

or equal

to

I

Find the value

= oTK f(jr which z - 1 is a cUi^ed-ioop pole.

(b) Consider the root Iol^us for i^ < 0. In this case, the system becomes un?jiable

when one of the ctosed-ioop poles Js greater than or equal to 1 . Fjnd the value
of K foT which z = 1 is a closed-loop pole.

(c> What is ihe full range of valuer? of AT for which the closed-loop system is stable?

1I.43. Consider a. discrete-time feedback systetn with

Giz}H{z) =

^

(z- 1)

> (a) Sketch the root locus for ^

and for A: < 0.

K (b) If you have sketched the root locus correi^tly for 7> 0, you will see that the

two branches of the n>ot locus cross and exit from the unit circle. Consequently,

< < we can conclude that the closed-loop system is stable for

A' K^^, where

/To is Lhe value of the gain for which the two branches intersect the unit circle.
W At what points on the unit circle do the branches exit from it? hat is the value

offi^o?
A 11J4, As mentioned in Section 11 the coniinuous-cime Nyquist criterion can be ex-
tended tci allow for poles of G<s>H<i> on the jw-aKis. In this problem, we will illustrate the general technique for doing this by means of several examples. Con-
sider a cflntinuouft-time feedback system with

0(s)H(s) = ---i-TT
sis+ 1

{PI 1 44^1)

When G(.?)ff(i) has a pole at s = 0, we naodify the contour of Figure 11.19 by a^'oiding the origin. To do this, we indent the contour by adding a seinicircle of
infinitesimal radius t into the righi-half plane. [See Figure PI L44<a).l Thus, only
a small pMt of the right-half plane is not etvclosed by the mv>dified contour, arid
-- its area goes to zero as we let e ~* 0. Consequently, as Af ^ £, the contour will
enclose the entire right-half plane. As in the text, Gis)H(s) is a constant (in [his case
zero) along the circle of infinite radius, Thus^ to plot G(\)H(5) along the cotrtoui,
we need only plot it for the portion of the contour consisting of the yw-axis at*! the
infinitesimal circle.
(a) Show that

<G(j[)^)H{JO^) = -|

and
<GijO-)tiijO-) = |,
where .t = jO~ is the point where the infinitesimal semicircle meets the jwaxis just below the origin und s = JO^ is the corresponding point just above
the origin,
(b) Use the result of part (a) together with eq. <Pll 44^1) to verify that Figure P11.44(b) is an accurate sketch of Gis)H{s) along the portions of the contour

866

i¨ t>>=
<A,

(b)

Figure Pit.44

Chap. 11

Prot>lenn$

887

from -ycc to J0~ and JO" to ;¨ In paiticulan check that <0(jio)HiJ(it) and \G(Juf)fi[jai)\ behave in the manner depicted in the figure,

(c) All ttiat remains to be done is to detemune the plot of G{s}H{s) ailong the

small .'temicirck about j - 0. Note Ihai as e --* 0> the magnitude of G(^}H{s)

-- aJong chj$ contour goes to infinity^ Show chat as c ^ D, the contribution of the

= pole at s

-- 1 to <.G{s)H{s^ ailong the semicircle if: zero. Then show that as

<C(s)i/(s> = -e,
where B is as defined in Figure Pi 1.44(a). Ihui^ since varies from -tr/l at
s = jO to -f it/2 at y = yO"^ In the counterclockwise direction, <CU)H{s) must go from + 7r/2 at J = jO^ to --it/2Ms - /O^ in the clockwise direction.
Ttie result is the c^ii^Iete N>quist plot depicted in Figure PI 1.44lc>-

(c)

Figure PI T .44 CoatintMl

,

1

BBS

Linear Feedback Systems

Gh^p. 1

K (d> Using the Nyquisi j^ot of Figure PI 1.44(c), find the range of values of
for which the closed-loop feedback system i& stab)e. (Note: As presented in
the cext^ the continuouS'time Nyquisl criterion states that, for closcd^loop sys-
tem stability, tlie net number of clcfckwise encirclements of Lhe point '\/f( mu^t equal minus the net mimber of right-half plane poles of G(j)//(i-). In the
present example, note that the pvsle of G{s)H(s) at s = is outside the moditied contour ConseqLently, it ts, nor included in counting the poles of G(jW(j)
in the rigbt-half plane [i.e,,only poles of G(.t)//(j) strictly inside the right -half
plane are counted in applying the Nyquistcriteriotil. Thus, in this case, since
Gis)tiis) has no poles strictly inside the rie:ht-half plane, we must have no
= encirclements uf the point J -1/A^ for closed-loop system stability.)
(e) Follow the steps outlined in parts CaHc) to sketch the Nyquist plots for each
of the following:
TMif (i) G(s)HU) =

(iii) G(s)H(s) = ^ [be careful in calculating <G(s)H{s} along the mftnites

~- imal semicirclel
(iv) G(s)H{s) ^

[be careful in calculating <C(jcu>f^(yw) as (^ ii var-

ied; make sure lu lake the minus sign in the denominator into account]

^ (v) GUiHis) =

[same remark as for (iii)]

K In each case, use the Nyquist criterion to determine the range of values of

(if any such range exists) for which the closed- loop system is stable. Also, use

another method (rooc locus or direct calculation of the closed-loop poles as a

function of K) to provide a partial check of the correctness of your Nyquist

plot. [N&^e: In sketching tie Nyquist plots, you may find it useful to sketch the

Bo<le pilots of Gis)His) first. It may also be helpful to determine the values of

^y for which GiJ(o)H{Jtii) is real]

^ <f> Repeat part (e) for: (i) G{s)/iis) = ^ = (ii) G(s)His^

Note: In these cases there are nvo poles on the itnaginary axis; accordingly,

you will need to modify the contour of Figure 11.19 to avoid each of them.

Use infinitesimal semicircles, as in Figure Pi [ ,44(a).

11 A5. Consider a system with system function

+ - {s 1 )<^ 2)
Because this system is unstable, we wouid like to devise some method for its sta-
bilization
(a) Consider first a series compensation ^heme as illustrated in Figure PI 1 .^5(a).
Show that tjie overall system of this figure is st^le if the system hinction

Jn practice, this is not considered to be a particularly useful way tc attempt to
stabilize a system. Explain why.

.

Chap. 11

Problems

Mt)

*- C<*l

H^s)

-^ytt>

<a)

88^

Mt)

:ˋ.

C(s>

H(3;

/(t)

tb)
Figure P11 .45

u^ (b) Suppose that instead we a feedback system, as depicted in Figure P 1 1 .45(b).
[s it possible to stabilize this system using a constsmt gain, that is,

C(s) -= K.

for the stabilizing element? Justify your answer using Nyqui^t techniques.
-- (c) Show that the systeiti of Figure PI I -45(b) can be stabilized ifCis) is a proportional plus derivative system ^ihai is. if

C\s) - Kis + a).

Consider both the case (d> Suppose ihai

< a < \ and the case a > 1 C{s) = K{s + 2),

Choose the value of K such that the clo&ed-L[x>p sy^em has a pair of coinplex

= U fJoles with a damping ratio f

1/2. iHint: this cas¨. the deoominator of the

ctosed-l(Kip system rnust have th& form

wj s^ -y- Èo,,j ^-
fpr some value of Wj^ > 0,)
(e) Pure derivative compensation is both impossible to obtain and undesirable in practice. This is because the required amplification of arbitrarily high frequen cie^ neither can be obtained nor i^ advisable, as al^ real systems are subject to
some level of high-frequency disturbances. Thus, suppose thait we consider a
compensator of the form

C(.0 = ^|ii^ a,h>Q.

<P 11.45-2)

1

890

Linear Feedback Systems

Ch^p 1

< < w > If fc

fl, this h a la^^ network'. <C{jijj)

for ^H

0, ^n that the phase

> > of the output of the system lags the phase at" the input If t a, <C{jijj)

> for aJi <(i 0, and the system is ihen tailed a lead net^^^ork.

(i> Show thai it is possible to stabihze the system with the kad tompensatyr

C{s) - K 1Ý1
T+2

(PI 1.45-3)

if A!' is chosen large enough,
(it) Show that it is not possible to stabiUze the feedback system of Figure P 11,45(b) using the lag network

C{s)

=

Kj
s

+ +

3
r

Hint: Use the resuks of Problem 1 1 .34 in sketching the root locus Then detcnnine the poinu on the jio-^xvA that are on the iioot iocus and the
^ values of for which each of these points is a closed-loop pole. Use this ^ infomiation to prove that for no value of are ail of the closed-loop poles
in the left-half plajie.
11.46. G>nsider the continuous- time feedback system depicted in Figure PI 1.46(a3.

--^^

xft)

J

5-10
[S 1 Ijs

10 (s/1 00-^1)?
fa}

T\

% (StIOJe ^

-
,

1

^ -,'{tl

10 [5/100+1)2
(tj)

Figure P1 1.46

Chap. 11

Problems

891

(a) Use the straight-lin^ approximations to Bode plots developed in Chapter 6 to obtain a sket[;h of the Log magnitude-pha^ plot of this system. Estimate the phase and gain margins from your plot.
(b> Suppose that there is an unknown delay within the feedback system, so that
the actual feedback system is as fihown in Figure PI 1.46(b)- Approximately what la the largest delay t that can be tolerated before the feedback system becomes unstable? U^e your results from part (a) for diis calculation, tc) Calculate mere precise values of the phase and gain margins, and compare
these Uj your results in part (a). This should give you some idea of the $ize of the errors that are incurred in using the approximate Bode plots.
11*47, As mentioned at the end of Section 1 1 .5£ the phase and gain margins may provide su^ient conditions to ensure that a stable feedback system remains stable. For example, we showed that a stable feedback system will rem^n stable as the gain IS increa^ed^ until we reach a limit specified by the gain margin. This does nor imply (a) that the feedback system cannot be made unsiable by detreasmg the
gain or (b) that the system will be un.stable for ail values of gain greater than the
gain margin limit. In this problem, we illustrate these two points,
(a) Consider a continuous-time feedback: system with

(s-i)(y-i-2)(,s + ^y

^ > Sketch the n>t}t loous for this system for

0. Use the properties of the root

W locus described in the test

in Problem 1L34 to help you draw the locus

accurately. Once you do so, you should see that for small values of the gair.
K the system is unstable* for larger values of K the system is stable, while

for still larger values of K the system again becomes unstable. Find the range

of v^ucs of K for which the system is stable. Hint: Use the same method as

is employed in Example 1 1.2 and Problem 11.35 to determine the values of

A' at which branches of the root locus pass through the origm and cross the

/w-axis.

If we set our gain somewhere within the stable range That you have just

found, we can increa.se the gain somewhat and maintain stability but a large

enough increase in gain eausei the system to become unstable. This maximum

amount of increase in gain at which the closed-loop system just becomes un-
stable is the gam margin. Note that if we decrease the gain too much, we clui

aUo cajse instability,

K (b) Consider the feedback system 3f pan (a) with the gain set ai a vatue of 7
Show that the closed-loop system is stable. Sketch the log magnitude-phase

plot of this system, and show that there are two nonnegative \alues of ft>

^ fox which <C(jw>//Cja>)

tt. Further, show that, for one of these values

< > 7\G(.jw)H{J(u)l

1, and for the other 7\G(jfo)H(jii^)\

1, The tirst value

-- provides us with the usual gain margin that is, the factor ]/\7G(Juf)H(jiii)\

by whvch we tan increase the gain and cause instability The second provides

us with the factor U\7G{i<ii)H{jto}\ by which we can decrease the gain and

ju^t cause instability.

=

B92

Linear F^dback Systems

Chap. 11

<c) Cotist^cr n feedbiack sy.stem with
¨*£

'-^^

> Sketch the root l<icuJi for Jf 0. Show that two branchcit of the root locus begin
in the left-haJf plane and, as AT is increased, inove into the right-half plane and
then bacfc into the left-half plane. Do this by examiniiig the equation
GOW(£ = --i.

Specifically^ by equating the real aiid imaginary parts of this equation, show
K that there are two viilues of ^ for which the closed-ioop poles lie on the
ju)-axis.
Thus, if we set the gain at a sit^l enough value so that the system is stable, then we uan incraase the gain up until the point at which the twt> bi^ncbes
of the root locus intersect the yw-axiSn For a range of values uf gain beyond this
point, the closed-loop system is unstable. However, if we continue to increase
K ttie gain, the system will again become stable for large enough,
(d> Sketch the Nyquist plot for tht systern of part (c)£ and confirm the conclusions
reached in part (c) by applyit^ the Ny^^uist criterion. (Make sure to count the
net number of encirclements of -- 1/^.)
Systems such as that considered in parts (c) and (d) of this problem are often referred to as being cond3tlo?mUy .stable systems, because their stability
pmperties may chMige several times as the gain is varied.
1L4S, In this problem, we illuatr^te th¨ discrete-time counterpart of the technique de-
scribed in Problem 11.44. Specifically, the discrete-time Nyquist ctiterifln c£n be extended to sdlow for poles of Giz)H(z} on the unit circle.
Consider a thscnete-time feedback system with

Giz)H(z) = :\ j- -z ^^ - z^irz---^I^)

(Pn.48-1)

In this ca^e, we modify the c^ontour on which we evaluate G{z)Miz^y as illustrated
in Figure PI 1.4S(a).
(a> Show that

and

where z = e^^^ is the point below the real axis at which the smalt semicircle
= intersects the unit circle and ^ ^^" isthe corresponding point above the reaJ
axis.
(b) Use the results of parr (a) together with eq, (P1L48-1) to verify that Figure Pn.4a{b) i> an accurate sketch of CU)Hiz] along the portion of the

Chap. 11

Problems

893

(a)

fb)

Figure F1 1.48

894

Linear Feedback Systems

Cliap, 11

= contour i

e^'^ as qj varies froni 0^ to 2-7r~ in a counterclockwise direc-

tion. In particular, verify that the angular variation of G(f ^'^)//U^'"^ is as

indicated.
w (c) Find the value of for which <0{^'^)H{e^'^ ) = - tt, and verify that

= \G[^'^)H{e^"'\\

1

ill this point. {Him.' Use the geometrical method for evaluating <Gie^*^ )H {e^"^)
together with sorne elementary geometry to detertnine the value of <t^,J
(d) Consider nex; the plot of G{z)fi(z} along the small semicircle about r = 1.
^ Note that as e 0, the magnitude of G{z^{_z) along this contour goes to in-
finity. Show that as ^ -+ 0> the contribution of the pole at ^ = to <G{i)Hiz) along the semicirclt is zero. Then show that as e --* 0,

where ^ is as defined in Figure PI 1 .4S(a). Thus, since 6 varies from - irfl to ^irn in the counterclockwise direc-
tion, <G{z)H{z) varies from -Virfl to --'nfl in the clockvidise direction. The result is the complete Nyquist plot of Figure PI f4S(c). (e) Using the Nyquist plot, find the range of values of /T for which the closedloop feedback system is stablen [Note: Since the pole of G(i)//U) at ^ = I is

M Figure P , 4a ContifUJed

Chap 11

Problems

S95

inside the modified contour, it is not included in counting the poles of G(s}H(;} outside the unit circle. That h, only poles strictly outside the utiil circle are counted in applying the Nyquist criterion. Thus, in this case, since G{z)H{zi
hai no poles strictly outside the unit circle, we must have no encirclements ot thepoini^ = - l/JC for closed-loop stability]
(f) Foliow the steps outlined in parts (a), (b), and (d) to sketch the Nyquist plots for each of the following'

7-1

(ii) (lii)

^+^ (? IK: +
Zi I

(y^y \--iP- [^ careful in calculating <G{z)fi(.z) along the infinitesimal semi-
circle]
For each of the preceding, use the Nyquist criterion to determine the range
K of values of (if any such range exists) for which the closed-loop ny&tam is
.stable. Also, use another method (rootlwus or direct calculation of the closed-
loop poles as a function of K) to provide a partial check of the correctness of
your Nyquist plot. Note: In sketching the Nyquist plots, you tnay find it useful to first sketch the magnitude and phase plots as a function of frequency or at least calculate |G(^>)J/(i'^'")j and <G(eJ'^}Hie^'^) at several points. Also, it is helpful to detennine the values of (j for which G(f^*^)W(^'"^) is real, (g) Repeat part (fi for

G{z}H(z)

=

*
e-i'

In this case there are two poles ott the unit circle, and thus, you tnust modify the contour around each of these by iticluding an infinitesimal semicircle that
extends outside the unit circle, thereby placing the pole inside the contour.

EXTENSION PROBLEMS
11.49p In this problem, we provide an illustration of how feedback can be used to increase
the bandwidth of an aniplifier Consider an amplifier whose gain falls off at high frequencies. That is, suppose the system function of this amplifier la

s+a
(a) What is the dc gain of the amplifier (i.e., the magnitude of it.s freqiiency re-
sponse at frequency)?
(b) What is the systetn time constant? (c) Suppose we define the bandwidth of the system as the finequency ac which the
magnitude of the amplifier frequency response is 1/v^ times its magnitude at dc. What is the bandwidtli of the amplifier?

1

S96

Linear Feedback Systems

Chap. 1

(d) Suppose Vft place the amplifier in a feedback loop as depicted in Figure
P11.49. What is the dt gain of the closed-loop system? What are the time
constant and the bandwidth of the closed-loop system?
È (e) Find the value of that leads to a closed-loop bandwidth that is exactly double
the bandwidth of the open-loop amplifier. What are the corrciponding closed-
loop system time constant and dc gain?

x[t).

>

Gfl
s+ a

*- Vft)

Figure P1 1.49
11.50. As mentioried in the text, an important class of devices used in the implemeniation
A of feedback systems is the class of operational amplifiers. model for such an
amplifier i* depicted in Figure P11.5(Ka), 1\k amplifier's input is the difference
o+
^o(t)

Figure Pf ] .SOa

between two voltages V2{t) and V| (i), and the output voltage is an amplified version
of the ijiput; that is,

vM) = Klv^Jt) ~ V,{T)l

(PH. 50-1)

Consider an operational miplitier connection shown in Figure PI 1 .50(b). In

this figure* Z\ (j> and Z2(J) are impedances. (That is, each is the s>stem function of

an LTI system whose input is the current flowing through the impedance element

and whose output is the voltage across the dement.) Making the approximation

that the input impedance of the operational amplifler is infinite and that its output

impedance is zero, we obtain the following relationship between V|(.v), Vj(j), and

vM, V,,(i), the Laplace transforms of ^^(j), Vfiit), and

respectively:

V, =

Z2{S)

v,<^) +

2l(s)

VAs).

LZ](s) + Z2(i')J

lZi(s) + Z2(s]

(Pn.50-2)

--

Chap. 11

Problems

897

--I wv f

o v^t)

o
V|(t)

+
Vo(t]

--

Figure PI T50t>

Also, from eq. (PU,50^1) and Figure Pi]. 50(b), we sec thai V^{s) = -^V]Cs),
(a) Show that the system function

(Pll.50-3)

for the interconnection of Figure PI 1.50(b) is identical to the overall closedloop system function for the system of Figure Pt 1. 50(c).

Mt)

ZAs) Ai^) ^ Z?(s)

^ J'^

-K

Volt}

I

'

Zi(s) z,(s] j^Zj(a3

Figure Pi 1 .5Qc

£ A <b) Show that if

1, then

H{3) - - Z2(J)
Z,(J)

11,5!, (a) Suppose that in Figure Pn.5(Hb> Z\is) and Z2(j) are both pure resistances,
A *ay£ /f] and Ri, respectively. typical value for Rri.iK\ is in the range 1 to
10\ while a topical value for a: is 10*. Using the results of Problem 11.50(a),
K calculate the actual system function for this value of and for R^IR^ equal to
1 and then to Itf^, and compare each resulting value to -R-JR^ . This should give you some idea of how good th^ approximation of Problem 11.50(b)
typically is.

,

1

a 98

Linear Feedliack Systems

Chap. 1

fb) One of the itnport4nt ui>es of feedback is in the reduction of system sensitivity
tn Vijnatiuns in parameters. This is particvtarly important far circuits involv-
ing operational ampLiders, which have high g^itis that mjiy be known oi^ly
approximately.
(0 Consider the drcuit discussed in part (a), with R2^R\ = 10^ What is
the percentage change in the closed-loop gain of the systeni if A^ changes
from 10* to 5 X 10^'' (iO How large must /C be so that a 50% reduction in its value results in only
a 1% retluciion in ttie closed-loop gain? Again* take /?;//?! = 10^.
n.S2, Consider the circuit of Figure PI 1 .52, Thi& cvrcuit is obtEuned by using

in Figure PlL50(t>). Using the results from Problem 1 1,50, s^how rhai the system
behaves approximately hke an integrator. In vihat frequency rang,e (expressed in
O terms of K, R, and does this approximation break down?

v,(tl

v^(tJ

Figure Plf. 52

11,53. Consider the circuit depicted in Figure PI 1 .53(a>, which is obtained from the circuit
of Figure PI 1 .50(b) by using Z|(a) ^ R and by replacing Z2(j) with a diode that
has an exponcnti^ current- voltage relationship. Assume that this relationship is of
the form

lAO = Me-^'^-^^'^^^

<F]].53-\)

M where is a consvant that depends upon the construction of the diode. ^ i5 the
charge r>f an eleetron, k is BoJtzmann's constant, and T is absolute temperature.
Note that the idealized relationship of eq, (PI L53-1) assumes that thene is no pos-
sibility of anegative diode current. Usually, there rs.some small maximum negative value of diode current, but we will neglect this possibthty i* our analysis,
(fl) Assuming that the input impedance of the operational amplifier is infinite and that its output impedance is zero, show that the following relations hold:

VAT) = vAt)^/iiAO + W(a

<P1 1.53-2)

vAO = -f([vM}-yAO\.

<P 11.5^3)

Chap. 11

Problems

899

vM)

Figure PI 1.53a
K ih) Show that for large, the relationship between v,j(f> and v^(/) is essentially
the same as in the feedback system of Figure PI 1 .53(b), in which the sysLem in the feedback path is a nonlinear memoryless system with input v^O) and
output
wij) = RMe^""^'^'^\ (c) Show that for ff large.
(PH. 53-4)

v,(n

Q

-K

^M

w(t)

w{t)=RMe<i'b<^J^*^T

F^ure Pir53b

Note that eq. (PI L53-4) niEikes sense only for a negarive v',(/), which ts con-
sistent with the requirement that the diode curretii cannot he negative If a posiLive Vf{j) is applied, the current Uit) cannot balance the current through the lesistor. Thus, a nonnegligihle current is fed into the amplifier, causing it
to saturate.
IL54, [n This problem, wc explore th"fe use of pt>sitive feedback ft>r generating oscilladng
signals
(a) Consider the system illustrated in Figure PI 1, 54(a) Show that j/(/) = jrr(r>if

Cis)H{s\ = -\.

(P11.54-l>

Suppose that we connect terminals I and 2 in Figure PlL54(a) and malte Xi{t) = 0. Then the output of the system sh(?uld remain unchanged if we

1

900
3
1 .
-1

^jt^-o

7>

+
,

H(3)

'

e(B)
{3) His.]

Linear Feedback Systems

Chap. 1

^y(t)

-1

G{5)

(t£)

F;gureP1 1.54

satisfy eq. (f 11.54-- I). The system now produces an output without any inpuc.

Therefi^ret the system shown in Figure PI 1 .54(h) is an t^icil^atoT, pr&'^ided that

eq. (Pll.54-1) is satLsiied.

(b) A commonly u.sed osicillator in practice is the sinusoi-dal oscillatof. For such aci

WEmay oscillator,

rewrice the condition of eq. (PI 1.54--1) as

G(J<oo)mjm) = -1

(PI 1,54-2)

What is the value of the closed-loop gain for the system shown in Figure PI 1.54(b) at too wheneq (Pli.54^2) is satisfied?
(c) A sinusoidal o.scillaior may be constnicted on the basis of the pnndple out-
lined above by using the circuit shown in Figure PI h54(ct. The input to the

^s(5)
Figure PI 1.54c

Chap.11

Problems

^01

amplifier is the difference between the voltages v\{t) and V2(') In this circuit,
^d t}ic ampiifier has a gain of A and an output resistance of /Èo- -^i (^)> ^{^)y
Z^{^) are impedances. (That is, each is the system function of an LTl system whose input is the cumenc /lowing through the impedance element aad whose output is ttie voltage across the element,) It can be shown that, for this circuit.

where
Zl = Z2(s){Zi(s) + Z^is]}
Z,fj) + Z:.(y) + Z3(i)" Also, we can show that

(i) Show that

G{^'ms)

=

AZi{syZ2U}
Ro(Zi(s) + Z^is) + Z~As)) -H Z2{s)(Z,(s) + Z,U)y

(tij If Z|(j), Z2(:y>, and Z^is) arc pure reactances (i.e> inductances or ca-

= pacitances), we can write Ziijdt)

jX\ij</>}, Ziijttf) = jXzijc^X and

= Zi(J(it)

jX^jut}, whore .Y,0"tu>, i = 1, 2, 3, are all real. Using the re-

sults of pans (b) and (i), show that a necessary condition for the circuit to

pnxiuce oscillations is

(iii) Show/ aiso that, in addition to the constraint of part Cii), the constraint i4Y](/Èti) - X2ij<*>) has to be satisfied for the circuit to produce oscillations. [Since Xi(jic>) is positive for inductances and negative for capaLTiiances, the latter constraint reqnues that Zi(j> and Z2(s} be reactances of the same type (i.e., both should be itiductances or both should bo capacitances).]
(iv) Let us assume that Ziis) and Z^Cj) are both inductances such that

Let us also assume that
^jU'i') = -l/(wC)
h a capacitance. Use the cijndition derived in (ii) to derermine the fre-
Q quency (in terms of L and at which the circuit oscillates.
\\JS5, (a) Consider the nonrectu-sive discrete-time LTlfilter depicted in Figure P1 1 .55(a), Through the use of feedback around diis nonrecursive system, a recursive ftiter can be implemented. To do so^ consider the conHguraiion shown in Figure P11.55<h>, in which H{i\ is the system function of the noniecunsive LTI system of Figure PI 1 .55(a). Determine the overall system of diis feedback

--

902
m

Linear Feedback Systems

Chap. 11

system, and find The difference equation relating the input tti the output of the
overaJJ system.

D

1^-^ D

£

Ca
ˋ

(aj

' C9
Ki)

Cm
-*-(+) £- Vlri]

1
K

1

,

Htz)

FJgunPII.55
Ob) Now suppose that Hit} in Rgure PI 1.55(b) is the system function of a lecur-
sJve LTI systein^ Specifically, suppose that
'^c.z-
¨U> = ^'-

Show how one can ftnd values of the toeffldentsK', ci
such Ch^ the c:[ose<I-Joap system function is
^f
S*-^"' Q(x} = i = a
i=0
where the a; and hi are specified coefficients.

Cf,j, anddon

d^,

Chag 11

Problems

?03

Tn this problem, we have seen that ttie use of feedback, pio^'ides us£ witti aJtema-
iivt implementations of LTI systems specified by linear constani-coetficietit differerite equatiiins. The iTDplementation in part (a), consisting of feedback around a noniecursive system^ is particnlarly interesting, as some technologies are ideally suited to jmplementjng tapped dclay-lijie structures <i,e., systems consisting of thainsi of delays with taps at each delay whose outputs are weighted and then summed).
11.56. Consider an inverted pendulum mounted on a movable cart, as depicted in Figure
PI 1.56. Here> we have modeled the pendulum as consisting of a massless rod of
m L length with a mass attached at the end. The variable 0{j) denotes the pendu-
lum's angular deflection fram the vertical, g is gravitadonal acceleration, j(r> is
the pesition of the cart with respect to some reference point, a(t) is the acceleriition of the cart, and xit) represents the angular acceleration resuUing from any
disturbances, such as gusts of wind.

F^tjnePII.56

Our goal in this problem h to afl^y ze the dynamics of the inverted pendulum
and, more specifically, to investigate the problem of balancing the pendulum by a judicious choice of the acceleration cj(t) of the can. The differential e*^uation (lelating &([)^ a{[X and xO) is

^--7^ = gsin[e(f)] - a<r)c(is[(9(r)l + Lx(n

(PI 1 56-1)

This relation merely equates the actual acceleration of the mass along a direction perpendicular to the rod to the applied accelerations [gravity^ the disturbance acceleration due to xiO, and the cart's acceleration] along this direction.
Note that eq. (Pll.i^-l) is a nonlinear differential equation The detailed,
exact ajtalysis of the behavior of die pendulum requires that we examine this equation; however, we can obtain a great deal of insight into die dynamics of the pendulum by perfomiing a hnearized analysis. Specifically, let us examine the dynamics of the pendulum when it is nearly veitic^ [i.e., when ^(0 is small] In this case, we

1

904

Linear Feedback Systems

Cbap 1

i^aji make the approjtiniations
- - sin[l9(r)] Oit], co^[^(0] l^

(PH 56-2)

(fl) Suppose that the cait is stationary [i.e.^ a(t) = 0], and consider tha causal LTI
system with input x(t) and output d{t) described by eq. (PI 1 56^ 1 ), together with the approximations givenineq, {PI 1,56-2J, Find the system function for this system, and show that it has a pole in the right-half of the plane, implying that the system is unstable. ih) The lesuU of psul (a) indicates that if the cait is stationary, any minor angul^ disturbance caused by x{t) will lead ty growing" angular d^viatujns from the vertical. Clearly, at some point, these deviations will become sufficiently large so that Lhe approj^imations of eq, (PH-Sb--2) will no longer be valid. At this point the linearized analysis h no longer accurate, but the fact that it is ac-
curate for small angular displacements allows us to conclude that the vertical
equilibriuTn position is unstable, since small angular displacements will grow
rather than diminish.
We now wish to consider the problem of stabilizing tha verucal position of Ýe pendulum by moving the cart in an appropriate fashion. Suppose we try
-- proportional feedbacl: that is,

a[t) = KBIT).

Assume that 9{t} is smalU so that the approximations in eq. (Pi 1,56-2) are valid. Draw a block diagram of the linearised system with &{r) as the output, x(t) as the external inputs and a(t) as the signal that is fed baok. Show that
K Ýe resulting closed-loop system is unstable. Find a value of such that if
x{t) = 5(/>, thependuluin will sway backandforth in anundamped oscillatory
fashion,
(c) Consider using the propordonal -plus-derivative tPD) feedback,

.(0 = Km) + K.^.

Show that one can find values of Ki and K2 that stabilize die pendulum. In

fact, using

- jl 9.8 m/sec^

and

(Pll.56-3)

L = 0.5 m,

chdose values of ^j and A2 so that the damping ratio of the closed loop system is 1 and the natural frequency is 3 rad/sec.
1137, In this problem, we consider several examples of the desigti of tracking i^ystenris. Consider the system depicted in Figure PI 1.57. Here, Hp{s) is the system whose output is to be controlled, and H^is) is the compensator to be designed. Our objec-
tive in choosing Mds) is that we would like Ýe output y{t) to follow the input x{tX
In particular, in addition to stattilizing the system, we would also like to desigti the
system so that the error e{ty decays to zero for certain specified inputs-

C^lap, 11

Protrtems

905

x[t]

H,(s)

W- Hc(s)

t

> V(t)

1
Figure P1 1 ,57

(a) Suppose that

Of
^pO) - n J <-

ff ^0.

fP11.57-l}

Shosv thiit if //^ (t) = if (whkh is known a<; pnfportionai tir /* control), we

tan choose K so as to stabihze the system and so chat ^i f) --^ if a(0 - 5(0

Show that we cannor get ^(/)

-- ^

if x{r) = M(f)

(b) Again lei Hp{!,) be as in eq. (PI L57-I), and suppose that we use pmp^m^/ia/-

pfUS-integral (PI) control^ that JSh

fijs) - ^, + ^.

^ ^ Show that we can choose fC^ and *^2

to sttibilize the system* ind we tan

also get e(0 ^0\i\(t) = J w( /). Thus, the system can track a step n fact, this

illustrates a basic and important principle in feedback system design: To track
a step [^{s} = l/s]^ we need an integrator (l/j> in the feedback system. An

extension of this principle is considered in the next problem.

(c) Suppo^^e that

-- = f^p - '

-
Ks ~i\"yo^

Show that we cannot stabilize this system with a PI controller, but that we t;an stabilize it and have it track a step if we use proportion<it-pivi,-inie^ral-piu:^-
dijferentiai (PID) control, i.e.*

^ + tf,(i) = /:,

+ K^s.

s

11.5it. In Problem I L57, we discussed how the piresence of an integrator in a feedback system can make it posjuble far the system to track a step input with zero error in the steady state. In this problem, we esttend the idea. Consider the feedback
system ilepicted in Figure PI L.^iS, and suppose that the overaJl closed-loop system is stable. Suppose also th^t

Kl\U-^,)

- //{i)

-k

I

n-i

1

90b

H(s)

Linear Fee<iE>3ck Systems

Chap. i

*^y(t)

Figure P1 .5S

where the rtt and /S^ are given nonz-ero numbers and / is a positive integer The feedback system of Fig\ire P11.5S is often referred to as^Type J feedback system. I'a) Use the final-value theorem (Section 9.5,10) to show that a Type 1 feedback
-- system c^n. track a step that isn that

^0 e(j)

if x{0 = w(l)

(b) Similarly, show that a Type I systetn cantiot track a ramp, hut raihcr, that

eit) -+ a finite constant if

= xir) u-iit).

(c) Show that^ for a Type 1 system, unbounded results ensue if

x{0 = M-;(0

with k>2.

(d) More generally, show that£ for a Type I system:

40 ^ (i) e(t) -> Oif

= w-i(r) with k

I

-- (li) ^0) *- a finiteconstatuif ji:(0 = Uf.-,'4i)(0

>/+ (iii) e{t) -> ^\f x{t) = u-kU)vfiihk

1

11.S9, (a) Consider the discrete-time feedback system of Rgare P11.5y. Suppose that

H^z)

^y(n]

Figure Pn ,59

Sh&w tt^t ttiiÈ systetn can tratt a unit svep in the sen^e that if x[n] = ii[n],
then

= lim e[n) 0.

(PI 1.59-1)

(b) More generally, consider the feedback system of Figure PI L59, and iLssume ihat the ciosed-loop system is stable. Suppose that Hiz) has a pole at 4 = 1.

'

Chap. 11

Problem&

907

Sho^^ that the system can triick a unit ^tep, [Hinr Express the Lranhfonri E{z) of e[n] in tenns of H{z) and the tran^fonn of ¨[/tl; explain i^hy all the poles of E(z) are inside the unit circle.) (c) The results of parts (a) ^ind Cb> are disi^reie-Lime counterparts of the resuJLs for cofitmuouS'tifTie systems discussed itl Problems 11.57 and 11.58. In discrete
timcj we can also consider the design of the systems that track specified inputs perfectly after a finite number of steps. Such systems arc known as deadbvat
feedback systems. Consider ;he discrete- lime .system of Figurt PI 1.59 with

-I

Show that the overall closed-loop system is a deiulbeat feedback system with

= the property that it tracks a step input exactly after one step: Ihat is, if x[tj]

^ u[/i]. then e[n] - n (\,

1.

(d) Show that the feedback system of Figure P] 1 ,59 with

}r, \ , l_-2
(I + {z-';i\- r')

is a deadbeat system with the property that the output tracks a unit step per-

fectly after 3 finite number of steps. Ar what time step does the error f [flj first

settle to zero?

(e) More generally, for the feedback system of Figure PI] .59. tiiid Hi?) so thai

^ yln] perfectly tracks a unit step for n

A^ and. in fact, so that

N- 1
e[n] = ^af,S[n- kl

(PI 1.59-2)

where the a, ar^ specified constants. Hi/Jt: Use ihe relationship between Hiz)
andÈ(?) when the input is a unit step and e[n\ is given by eq. (PI 1.59-2).
(f) Con.^ider the system of Figure Pi 1 .59 with

(1 f r'Kl - z-^)-'
Show that this system tracks a ramp.i:[tti = {n + l)u[fl] exactly after two time
steps.
11,60, in this problem^ we investigate some of the properties of sampled data feedback
systems and illustrate the use of such systems. Recall from Section 11.2.4 that in a sampled-data feedback system the output of a continuous- time system is sampled. The resulting liequence of samples is processed b> adiscrete-time system the output of which is converted lo a continuous-time signal that in turn is fed back and subtracted from the esttemaJ input to produce the actual input to the continuous-
time system.

1

90e

Linear Feedback Systems

Ch^p. 1

(a) Consider the system within dashed lines in Figure 11, 6(b). This is a distj^te-
time syst&m with input el£} artd DUtput p[n]. Show that Jt is an LTI jysteiB. As we have indicated in the figure, we will let F{z} denote the system tunctioTi of
this system,
(b) Show that in Figure lL6(b) the discrete-time system with system function
F(z) is related Lo the continuous-time system with system iunction His) by means of z step-invariant transformation. That is> if J(l) is the step resptinse of the contiTiuouS'time system and q[ti] is the step ri^spon^ of the discrete-time system, then

= ij{fi}

si/tT)

for aJi k.

(c) Suppose that

His) - ^^,(n*{.^}> 1.

Show ttliLt

r = '^ \('.'.^t\

- ^
\

c' ^ _ J

'I

=

^ r^

/*

K *^

(d) Supposethat ff(j)isa& inpart (c) andthatCt;) = ^. Find the range of values
^ of for which the dL>sed-loop discrete- time system of Figure 1 1 .6(b) is stable.
(e) Suppose that

CAz) = 1^1:
Under what conditions on T can we find a value of K that stabilises the ovei^l T system"? Find a particulai' pair uf viilues for A" and that yield a stable cbsed-
lCK:p system. Hint: Examine the root locus, and find the values for which the
poles enter or leave die unit circle.

Appendix
Partial-fraction expansion

Al JNTTRODUCrrON

The purpose of this appendix is to describe the technique rf partial -fraction expansion.

This tool IS of greai value in the study of signals and systems; in particular^ it is very

useful in inverting Fourier, Laplace, or ^-iransfonns and in analyzing LTL systems de-

scribed by Mnear constant-coefficient differeniial or difference equations. The method of

paitial-fraction expansion consists of taking a function that is the ratio of polynomials and

eTcpandingitas a linearcombinatjonof simpler terms of the same type. The determination

of the coefficients in the linear con^bination is the basic problem to be solved in obtaining
the expansion. As we will see, this is a relatively strai|htf(>rwaitl problem in algebra that

can be solved very efficiently with a bit of "bookkeeping."

To illustr<ite the basic idea behind and rtile of parti al-fractitm expansion, consider

the analysis developed in Section 6.5.2 for a second-order continUou.s-time LTr system

specified by the differential equation
^ ^ 2^u.,,^ + u>lyM = u>lxitX

(A.I)

The frequency response of this system is

^ijoi) - ,. ,^^^, \. ,^ , ,

or, if we factor the denominator.

where

^}
(yw - Ci)Oai - C2)
C\ = -i<i},, "roi^j^^ - 1,

<A.2)

Having H{ja)). we are in apesition to answer a variety of questions related to ihe
system. For example, 10 deterrnine the impulse response of tbe systenfi, recall that for atiy
< number a withCH*{j} 0^ the Fourier transform of

is

XdM) = ^^^.

(A.6)
909

910

Appertdi^

while if then

J2(0 = te'-'uirX

(A.7)

ay - {j<t>
Ttierefore, if we can expand Hijca) ai a sum of terms of the form of eq. (A.6) or (A.8), we can determine (he inverse transform of H(jw) b> inspection. For example, in Section 6,5.2 we noted that when ci =5^ ct, ffijbf} in eq. (A, 3) could be rewritten in the
fonn

-^ ,

(A.9)

p^ In this; case, the Fourier transform

of eqs. (AS) and (A.6) allows us to write down

immediately the inverse transform of /i/{jai) as

^ - - hii)

or

^l

C\ - Cl

I

C2

t^L

liitl

(A. 10)

While we have phrased the preceding discussion in terms of continuous- Lme Fourier
transfomis, similar concepts also arise in disciete-titne Founer analysis and in the use of Laplace and ^-transforms. In all nf these cases, weencounter the important class of rational transfotms--^^i is, transforms that are ratios of polynomials in some variable. Also, in each ofthe.se contexts, we find reasons for expanding these transfonns as sums of simpler terms such as in eq. (A.9), In this section, in order to develop a general procedure for
calculating the expansions* we consider rational functions of a general variable v\ that is* we examine functions of the form

For continuou5-time Fourier ait^ysis (yw) plays the role of v, while for Laplace transforms that role is played by the complex variable s. In discrete-time Fourier analysis,
V is usually taken to be *r"^^, while for ^-transforms, we can use either z'^ or z. After we have developed the basic techniques of partial-fraction expansion, we will illustrate their
application to the analysis of both continuous-time and di.screte-time LTI systems,
A.2 RARTIAL-FRACnON EXPANSION AND COlNmNOUS-TIME SrGNALS AND SYSTEMS
For our purposes^ it is coavenient to consider rational functions in one of two standard forms. The setond of these, which is often useful in the analysis of discrete-time signals
and systems, will be discussed .shortly^ The first of the standard forms is

Appendix

9T7

In this font! the coefficient of the highest order term in the denominator i^ 1, and the order of the numerator is at least one less than the order of the denominator (The order of the
numerator will he less than n - 1 if fj^ ] =0.)
Tf we are given H{v) in the form of eq. (A. 11), we can obtain a rational function of the form t>f eq. {A,12) by jjerforrtiing two straightforward calculations. Firsts we divide
both the nunierator and the denominator of M(v} by an. This yields

+ Hir^) = r-i^*" + ym 1^"'' + ... y|V + 70
+ _ V" -+ ai3,,,,--iivV""^^' --I-!--._i+- ajv --1I-- oq

(A.13)

where

7m =

Ctn-i
' ¨>J 1

"n-2

¨fl-2
r

, . ..

m < If

¨, H{v) is called a stricsly proper rational function, and in this case, letting

^ hii yif,hi ^ yiH ., . H &,, = 7h,, and setting any remaining ^'s equal to zero, we see that

H{v) ineq. (A,LS> !È already of the form cf eq^ iA,!!)^ In most of the discussions in this

book in which rationaJ functions are considered, we are concerted primarily with strictly

m ^ proper rational functiotis. However, if H(v) is not proper (i.e., if

n), we can perfonn

a prelinninary calculation that allows us to write Hiv) as the sura of a polynotnial in u and

a strictly proper rational function. That is,

The coefficients cq,c

, C;n-ft and bQ,b]

h,,-[ can be obtained by equating eq.s.

(A. 1 3) and (A. 1 4) and then multiplying through by the denominator. This yields

y^v"" + ...-t-jiV + yij = b,,.iv"-^ + ... + hiv + bo

^^^^

By equating the coefficients of equal powers of v on both sides of eq. (A. 15), we can determine tha c'% and b*s in terms of the as and y's* For example, if ffi = 2 arul n = 1>
so that

-- mv) = - '

= C] U + t'o + bo

(A- 16)

theneq. (A. 15) becomej^

yiV' ^y\v^y\) - bt) + ic\v + Ctj)iv + ai) = + + + bf) c^v^ -h (cfi fl]Ct)u flicti.

Equating the coefficienits of equal powers of v, we obtain the equaLions

72 = f],

7i = Co + aiCu

= + yo

ivi

fli Cif.

)

91 2

Appendix

The first equation yields the va]ut oic], which can then be used in the second to sulvc for C|>, which in turn can be used in the third to solve for bf^. The resuU is

The general case of eq. (A.I 5) can be solved in iin analogous fashion.
m Our goal now is to focus on the proper rational function G(y\ eq. (A. 12) and ty
expitnd it into a sum of simpler proper rationaJ /unctions. To see how this can be tlone, consider the case of n = 3, so that eq. (A,12) reduces to

G(,,, = /^^' ^/"^ ^ '"^ .

(A.17)

As a first siep> we factor the denominator of Giv) in order to write it in the form

Assuming for the moment ttiac the roots pt> P2> and p^ of the denotninator are all distinct,
we would like to expand G(v) into a sum of the form

^^ Giv) =

+ TMi^ + ^^.

(AT9)

A The problem, then, is to determine the constants 1, Ajy and A^ . One approach is; to equate
eqs, (A,18) and (A.l^) and to multiply through the denoininaior. In this case, we obtain
the equation

h2V^ + h]V + *o = Ai(v - P2>i^ " P?)
+ A2{v - piXlf - p3> + A^(v- P1XU-P2X

(A,20)

By expanding the right-hand side of eq. <A.20) atid then equating coefficients of equal powers of u, we obtain a set of linear equations that can be solved for At, A2, and Aj.
Although this approach always works, there is a tnuch tasier method. Consider
eq. (A.19), and suppose that we would like to calculate A\. Then, tnuliiplying thrt>ugh ry v -- Pi, we obtain

y^ ~ PiJO(yJ -- A\ +

u -- p3

+

.
" - p3

(A.2n

Since pi, p^. and pj are distinct, the last two terms on the right-hand sside of eq, (A. 21
are zero for v = p[ , Therefore,

Ai = [rv-pi)C(v>JL=^,,

(A.22)

or, uaingeq. (A. 18),

(pj -P2XPJ - P3)

,

Appendix

9T3

Similarly,

A2

=

[(V-P2)G{V)]1^^^

=

h2pl -^ b]P2 +bi)
iP2- P\Kp2 - P:iy

(A.24)

= Suppwfjc now that p\

p\ 9^ pi'^ thai is,

iP3 - P])ipl - pi)

(A.25)

{v - p[y(v - P2) In this cELse, we loot for an expansion of the form

(A.26^

C(r) - V- Pi +

^^^-IL
- r^.\2

[A.21)

Here, we need the Iflv-- pi)^ leim in order to obtain ttie correct denominator meq. (A 26)
when we collect terms over a least common denominator. We also need to include the m lAu - Pi ) term general. To see why this is so, consider equating eqs. (A.26) and f A.27)
and multiplying them through by the denominator of eq (A. 36):

b2V^ + fr]U -^0 = Ae]{v - pi)(u - P2)
- + A]2iv - P2) + A2\{i> Pi)'^

(A.28)

Again, if we equate coefficients of equal powers of u, we obtain three equations {for the coefficients of theu^, u^ andu^ ttrms). If we omit the A|j term in eq. (A.27), we will then have three equations in two unknown!!, which in general will not have a solution. By including this term, we can always find a solution. In this case also, however, there i'^ a much simpler method. Consider eq, (A,27) and multiply through by (v - pi )^:

iv- pifGiv] - A^iiv- pi) + An + A2[(v - P[)^

(.A..29)

From the preceding example, we see immediaiely how to determine j4] 2:

Ai2 =[<p-pifGiv)]l.^, - &2P? + tiPx +biy Pi - Pz

As for A|j ,

suppose

that

we

differcintiate

eq,

(A.29)

with

respect

to

v;

(AJOl

-^{iv ~ pd^Giv)] = An^A2i 2iv- Pi) (v- p[y v-pi {v-p^y^

(A.:^i)

= It is diet] apparent that the final term in eq, (A.3 1) is zero for u

pi , and iherefortf

An = \--{v-p,fG{v)

= ir pi

_ lh2p\ + hx Pi 'P2

h2p] + *ipi + 60
(^1 -- P^2^)^2

<A.32)

i

9T4
-- Finally, by niultiplyLng eq. (A. 27) by v pi. we find thai

Appendix

r - fp2

1>\

This example illustraies all of the basic ideas behind paitial-fraction expansion in the

general casw;. Specifically, suppose that the denominator of Giv) in eq. (A. 1 2) has distinct

rotjts pi

pLr with muhipUcities o-

, tr^; that is,

+ G{v) =

--

b,,-iv"

+ ^

...

b]V -i^ bt)

(A.34)

Tn this case, G{v) has a partial-fraction expansion of the form

-V- Giv) =

+ 'i -

+ + . ..

IfTi

Pi (V- pi)^

(v- Pi^i

+ ^2\

,

V- p2

^2^^
,
(v - p2r'

+ .

.

+

Ah

-
f

-

p^

+

...

+

...+

iV - prf-

r

iT,

^ik

-1 k^\

Y'

where the Aj,t ^^^e computed from the equation

(A.35)

Aja ^_

I

to-, *>!

tt^Kp - pir'G{vy\
ifif
V^f,,

(.A.36)

This result can be checked much as in the example: Multiply both sides of eq. (A.35) by {v - Pi)"' and differentiate repeatedly, until Aj^ is no longer multiplied by a power of V - Pi. Then set v = p^
ExampJe A. 1
In Example 4.25, wc e^tamine an LTI systt^m deincribed by the ditlcrential equatjon

(AJ7J

The frequency response of this S-ystem is

yw + 2
(jftt)^ +4jw + 3

(A.38J

To determine the impulse response for this system, we expand Hijio} into a sum
of simpler terms whose inverse transforms can be obtained b> inspection. Making the subsioition of v for Jta^ we obtain tht function

' Here, we use the facEon^ nr>uti?n ^! for the pruducL r(r- ])(r-l)
ro be equal [o 1

2 1 The quantity 0' IS defined

1

Appendix

Tht partial -fraction expansion for G(u) is then

4^ ^. G(,,) .

+

+ i^

1

V +3

where

9TS
{A.40]

Thui,

\_

J.

ajid ihe impulse re?ipo)iK.y of the system, obtainejJ by inverting eq. {AA3), is

hit) - ^f"'H(f) + ^f ^'wCO^

(A..44)

The system deKribed by eq. (A37h can slso be analyzed uiing the techniques of Laplace transform ai^alysis as developed in Chapter 9. The syslem function fur this
system is

and if we ^ub^tituie v tor s^ vj^ c*btain the same G(ui given in eq (^.!19>- Thus, vhe
ptartial-fraditjn expansintt proceeds cAactLy as in eqs. (A.40>-(A.42j, with the result that

Inverting this tranaforvn. we a^am ubtaintlvc uirtpwlve re^jponse, as given meq. lA44>.
Example A 2

We row illustrate the method of paitial-fratrion expansi^in when there are repeated factors in the denominator. In Example 4 26. we eijnsidfrred the response of the system
described in eq. (A.37) when the input was

^ jfO

e 'tf{t).

{A.47)

Fru-m

eq .

4 .8

h

the

Founer

trar]sfbrm

of

the

[jutput

of

the

system

is

Itli -\-
(jto + MHjtii -f- 3)
Substituting v for jti>, we ubtain the lational fiinction

G(v) = ---^-^-^-. + <.v -I- ly{v 3>

(A.49J

916

The partial- fraction expansion for this function is

---- G(v} =

----7
v-Hl

+

-
iv

+

l-yy

+

u---+^3,

where, (nim cq, <A 36),

(2 -- l)j av

*

Apperrdix (A.50)

/ii? = + r(iJ 3>C(ir>] [,,_-,- -^.

There fore.

-^-- ^^. 1

1

J:

y(yc^)

^

- /ÈU

1

4

^ (jfti -1-1)^

JW + 3

and taking invetM traiisfyrms. we get

y<t) - 1 _,

1 _,

1

.

uUl

{A,53) (A.54> {A.55)

Again ^ this analysis couid al^o have been perfonned using LapJace transforms, and the algebra would be identical to that gi\en in eqs. (A.49)-(A.55).

A3 PARTIAL-FRACTION EXPANSION AND DJSCRETE-TIME
SIGNALS AND SYSTEMS
As mentioned previously, in peifoiming partial- fraction expansions for discrete-time
Fourier transforms or for ;- transforms, it is often tnore ccmvenietit to deal with a slightly
different form for raiional functions. Suppose, then, that we have a rational function in the
form

This form for Giv} can be obtained from G(v) in eq, (A, 12) by dividing the numerator and denominator by a^.
With G(tr) as in eq. (A.56), the correspond itig factorization of the denominator is of the form

and the farm of the partial- fraction expansion that results is

.

Appendrx
The Bii; can be calculated in a manner similar to that used earlier:

917
(A. 59)

As before, the validity of tq. (A.59) can be determined by multiplying both sides of
-- eq, (A,58) by (1 p~'u)^', then differentiating repeatedly with respeot to v, until 5,^.
is no longer multiplied by a power of I - p~^v, and finally, setting u = p,
Exampfe A.3
Consider the causal LTI system in Example 5.19ctiaracterizcdby the difference et)uatioi>

y[n\- ly[n- ll+^y[n-2] = 2x\fil
The frequency reiponseof the system is

(A .60)

i

8

(A.61)

For discr<:t(;-tiTne iransforms such as this, it is most convenieni to substitute v for e ''
Making this substitution, we obtain the ratit>nal function

1 - 4u + ^r^

(1 - ivi(l - {v)

(A.62)

Using the partial -fraction expansion 'ipecified by cqs, (Ar57^-(Ar59X we obtain

tA.63)

Thus,

Bv. =

I - ^y]Ga)
^-2

= 4,
2

B:i -

1 - ^v\G{v)
11-4

I -2 - -2.

(A.64) (A 65)

Mien =
1 - ^f J^

~ ^

1^ ^^

tA.66)

and t^ing the inverse transform of eq. (A. 66), we obtain the unit impulse response;

In Section 10.7, we developed the tools of ^-transform analysis for the examination of discrete-time LTI systems specified by linear con st3Jit-c(£effii^ lent Jifference

918

Appendix

equitions. Applying those techniques to this example^ sve rini th^t [he system function can be detennined by inspection from e<\r (A.60) and is

fiU)-
\-\z ' + ki---^?

(A.68)

TTieiit substituting u for ; ', we obtain Gi\}) as in eq. (A_62j. Thus, using the partialfraction e^tpansicn ^IcuLatiori^ in eqs CA.63)--(A,65)j we find that

Hiz) =

iA.^9)

wbi^h, wb&n invertedn again yields the unit impulse response of eq. (A. 67).
Example A, 4
Suppose that the input to the b^stem considered in Ex:unpJe A. 3 ib

(A.70)

Then from Example 5.20, the Fourier transfoTm of the output ]s

= Yie'''}

2

(1 - if-^^Xl - U'^'^y

Substituting u for e ^'^ yields

¨S("> =
(I -^uKt- ^ij)^

Thus, using eqs. (A. 58) and (A.59)j we obtain the parrial-fraction expansion

^W

- 1

iJt...

_ ^12

- fl
[1

lLl..')L^?

- 1

L,

1

^l.

and find

(A,71) (A.72>
(A.7.^)

5,, =(-4)U(l.^|t.|au)

^ -4.

(A.74J

Therefore,

fl,2 - ^1 - ^l/J G(i/)

= -2,

=1*- ^21

2^1^<*^>

-8

tj-i

F|£

=

-.,.
]-i.

>

2-- -- + - 8
(l-^f-^-)2 1-^f-^-

(A.75) (^-76> (A.77)

,

Appendix

*1 ^

m which can be inverted by inspection as foLiowb, using tlie Fourier transfomi pairs
Table 4.2:

ylnj = - 4| iV - 2in + 1>[1T + f^T [£[¨]. 8

(A.7S)

Example A. 5
Improper rational fiincdons are often encountered in tbe analysis of djscrete-bme sys-
tem*. To iiiiLstrate this, and also to shew how they can be analyzed using the techniques
dcvel^jped here, consider the causal LTI system charactenzed by the differcince equation
y{n] + ^y[n - 1} + l>[n - 2] = 4¨] + ^A" " 1] - ^^l" - 2] + ^x[n - ^l
The fiequency response of this system is

m^"^) =

^

-^ ,

-,

s

(A, 79)

Substituting v for t-"^*^, we obtain

+|y+.iui
1
Tliis rational fiinction can be written as the sum of a polyitQTnial and a proper
ratioTia! function:

G(ir) = Co + c.iJ + -p-*i^-Ý,^
1 i- |l> H- 7V^

(A.8 n

Equating eqs. (A.SO) and f A.ROt and niultjplyiag hy 1 + |v + ^iV^^ we obtain

1 + 3u + -^ u^ ^ -u^ = (o + i>j> + {-cr> + 1] + bXj

<A.82>

^uating coefhcients^ we see that

Thus

I

5

li

5

L

^

^

1

+ = C{]

i£o = 1 -* i*o

0.

H{en = I + ^^-^'^ +

^ -. ^

(A.&4)

920

Appen<}ix

Also, we can use the meihod developed here to expand the proper r^lbnul fuiicrion
incq. (AS]):

J'li

^:l
,

fA-&5)

The coefficients are

Bn = ^14i.

= 1,

t- .1

Therefore we dud that J

-riV = -1 = -3 '

//(f^^) = 1-H2e ^" + -

+ 1

\I ^.?_-"^

+ I .._

1

^e-->^

iuid by inypection, we can deternuDe the impulse lespoose of this system;

i)-m¨ h{n\ = S[n] ^2Sin- IJ +

(A. 86) (A,K7)

Bibliography

The purpose of this bibliogiaphy is tu provide the reader with sources for a<iditLorLal and
m mcne advaticed treatments of topics signal and system analy^i^. This is by no means

meant to be an exhaui^tive list but rather it is intended to indicate direclionf, for further

study and sevcrai references for each.

We have divided the bibliography into sixteen different subject areas. The first few

deal with the mathematical techniques of signal and sysietB analysis including texts on

background mathematics (calculus, differential and difference equations, and complex

variables), the theory of Fourier scries and of Fourier, Laplace, and ^-transforms, and addi-

tional topics in mathematit;s that are commonly encotintered and lised in signal and s>stem

analysis, Seveial of the sections that follow deal with more thorough and specialized treat-

ments of topics in .signals and sy5tems introduced in this text^ including filtering, sampling

We and discrete-time signal processing, commitnications, and feedback and ctmtnjl.

have

alsu provided a list of other basii: books on signals and systems as well as several texts on

circuit theory. In addition, we have provided lists of references on several topics lha[ rep-

resent important subjects for more advanced study for those interested either in expanding their knowledge of the methods of signals and svstems or in exploring applications that make use of these advanced techniques. In particular we include sections on state ipace

m<ide1s and methods, multidimensional signal and image processing, speech processing,

niultirate and Tnultire';c>lulion signal anaLysig, random signals and statistical" signal prt)

cessing, and nonlinear systems Finally we have included a liat of references dealing with

a sampling of i^ther applications and advanced topics. Together, the references collected in

this bibliography should prijvide the reader with an appreciation for the breadth of topics

and applications thai comprise the field of signals and systems.

B. 1 BACKGROUND AND BASIC MATHEMATICS
B, 1 . 1 Calculus, Analysis, antf Advanced Mathematics
Ahikl^, G., and Webfr, H. }.,Marhitfiaricai Methodsfor PhyaicL^isAxh cd Boyion,MA; Academic
Press, 1995.
HiLSEBRANDi R E., Ail,?(inced Catculus for AppHcatit>rL\. 2nd ed, Englewood Chffs, NJ; Prentice
Hall, 1576.
Thomas, G. B., Jr.. and ^IN^E:Y, R. L.. CaLuiu^ and Analytic Geometn. 9th ed. Rending, MA.
Addison-Wesby, 1995.
B.f .2 Differential and Difference Equations
Bm-^HQi I ,G,, an<i R<jm, G.-C , Ordinary Differemiai Equations. 3rded. New York, NY: John Wiley
197W. -
Bo^t L, W. E., and DiPbima, K, C, Elementary Diffetvniiat Eqitations, 3rd ed. New Yojfc, NY: Jijhrt
Wiley, 1977.

92 T

.

922

BibFiogr^phy

Hn.HtBKMMD, F. B., Finite ibiffert'nce Equutions and Simulal ions, tinglcwood Cliffv. NJ. Prcntict
Hall, 196S,
Lev^, H,, an4LEi.sMyMM>F,, firtife Difference Equations. New York, NY: Macmilbn^ 196 1 SiMMOss. G. F.K DifftrenJiai Equations: WiJh Applicutionx and hlist<jyicai J^ofes. New York, NY'
MtGraw-Hill, 1972.

B,f3 Complex Variables
CrtRR[FR, G. R. Kro(iic, M., and PPARsav, C. E.^ fumrions of a Cr^rrtplex Vcirmble: Theory- und
Technique. Ilhaca, NY= Hod Books, 1^3. CHLihniTLi , R. v., BmjWN, J. W,^ and Vt-RHr>. R. F, Complex Vanabtes and Appht:iition.\ 5lh ed
New York. NY: MtGraiv-HilJ, [^9^1

B.2 SERIES EXPANSIONS AND TRANSFORMS

B-2. 1 Fourier Series, Transforms, and Applications
Bk.\(.lwh.l, R, N.> Thf Fourier TruAsfomt ami lis AppiicufioTt!^, 2od ed- New York. NY. MtUraw-

Churcwil-, R. v., and Browv, J, W., F<jurier Series J tin Boundary Value ProiAems. 3rd ed New
York, NYl McGraw-Hill, 1978.

DvM. H., and MpKean. H. R, Fourier Scries and Integrals. Ntw Y<;rk. NY: Academic F^ss. N72

Modem Edwards. R. E., /-"our/er.Vf/^jej; A

Introduction. 2nd ed. New York. NY: Si>riri^ur'Vcrla^,

1979.

CkAV, R. M,, and GtM>HAN^ J. W.. Fourier Tranxformx: Ar\ Introduction ft^r Enj^in^frs. Boston.
MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 1995.

\.iOVf\}M].\ ,}A.}.Jntroduciion Jo FourierAnalysis and CeTieraUzfCd Functions. New York. NY; Cam-
hridge University Piess, 1%2.

pAKtuLFi, A.^ The Fourier Integral and hi AppUcaUons. New York, NY: McGraw-JTill. 1987

Wa^kfr. p. L., The Theory oj Fourier Senes and Integrals. New Ycrk, NY: John Wiley, lySt.

B.2. 2 Laplace TV'ansforms
DfjETSfn, G,, Intwduction to the Theory and Appiicatkmji of the Laptavs Tramfonnation \frijh n
Table oj Lapl&ce Transformations. New York. NY: ^Springer Verfag, )974. IviiPvtjEi, W. R,. Complex Variaifia^ and the Uiptai:c Ttxtnsform for Engineer.', Ne* Yurk, NY:
McGraw-Hill, 1961.
Ra^vili l, E. D., The Luplace Tran.\form: An Introduction, N^w York, NY: Macmillan, 1 96-1.

B,2.3 z-Transfoms
Jury, E. I., Theory and AppHcaiifm of the Z-Transfomt Methitd. Malal^ar, PL- R, E- Krieger. 1982.
VicH, R.. 2 Transftfrm Theory andAppiicaiionn. Boston, MA; D, Reidel, 1^37.

Bibliography

^^^

B.3 ADDITIONAL TOPICS JN MATHEMATJCS

B3.1 Generalised Functions

Aks^c, J., Fourser Transforms and the Theory ofDisttihuHoas. TTaEi-^lated by A. Wusjsbaum and G.

C Heiin. Englewood Cliffs. NJ: Prentice Hall, 1 966.
Gm faki), 1. M. el al.. Genamlized funcuotts. 5 vols. Tr^^U^d by E. Salttan ci al. New York, NY:

Academic Press^ \ 964 -6S,

New HtfeKiNi, R F., Generatiseti Funriionf..

York. H\'. Halsted Prt*s, 1979.

H ZLHA^ILA^, A. , Distribution Theory cindTransformAnaiyxik. New York, NY; McGra\^-Hill, 1%5.

B.3. 2 Linear Algebra

MauU 0(m.in. C. H.^ and V^NLoAP^, C.Y,

ComputuUon.\.lt\6.^ BalUuiore: The John ^ Hopkins

LTniversity Pf ess, 19S^.

Ws HtJHN, R. A-, and Johnson, C. R.,

rri> Ami/v.¨j. New York, NY: Cambridgt University Press,

1985.
Stranc, G., Introdufium to Unear At^ebrcJ. Wtllt^ley, MA: WcUesky-Cambridge Presji, 1 ^^.

BA CIRCUIT THEORY

NY BoBROW. L. S,. EieTtJcntary Linear Circuit Ana!y^ij,. New York,

Hohn Rinehart, and Winston,

L9SL

Chua, L. O., r>L30EH, C, A,, and Kuh, E. S., Basic Circuit Theory. New Yyrk: McGraw Hill, 1987.

R Trvini ,

C, OperationaiAmpfifier Characteristics Èiad Applications, Englewcxi Cliffs, NJ: Pren-

tice Hall, 1Q^

RuBERutJ. K,, Op^ra//^3rtdMmj7/(^frj.- rit^rtr> arid Practice. New York. NY: John Wiley, 4975.

V^N V.^LKiiNBLiflo, M, E., S'etvirork Analysis. 3rd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pretitke Hall. 1974,

B.5 BASIC SIGNALS AND SYSTEMS

Cadzow, J. A., and Van LANrji?fGHA^^ H. F, iti'^nals and SystemSr Engltwocxl Cliffs. NJ. Prentice

liall, 1985.
Cruz, J. B., and V^jm V\i ke-nburo, M. E., Sif^natsin Linear Circuits, Bosioti, MA: Houghton Mifflm,

1974.

A NY Gahk, ft , and RoBtffrs, R. A., Signah and Unear Systems. 3rded. New Yoik.

John Wiley,

19ii7.
Glisson, T. H., Intrftfluction to System Anaiysis. New York, NY: McGraw-HiU, J 985,

HouT^, R. C. Signal Analys'^s in Linear Systems. Ne^w York, >fY: Sounders College, L991.

jAti^us, L. B,, Si^pais, Sysietns, and Transforms. Reading, MA; Addison -Wesley, 1^1*. Kambn. H., tTitrrniuction ttt Signals and Syiiem^ New York, NY: Macmillan, 1987.

Lathi^ B, p.. Linear Syxtems. and Si^nah. CarmlchHel, CA: Berkeley-Cambridge Press, 1992.
C Liij, L,, and Uv. J. W,, Linear Syjftem:! Analysis. New York! McGraw-Hill, 1975.

924

Bibliography

M.sviiAM, R. }., Discrete -fime and C(?nt/nuous-tttTte Lirteitr Systemsr Reading, MA: Addison -Wesley,
19S4.
McGELLii^T, C. D.. and Coopeh. G. R,. Cotumuous and Discrelf Sigaat and System Analysis. 3rd ed.
New York, NY; Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1991. Neff\ H. p., Coatinuous and Discrete Linear Syssems. New York^ NY: Harper and Row, 1 9S4. P^muLis, k., Si^na} Analvsts. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 1977.
SiF-HERT, W. M., Cirruifs. Signals, and Systems. Cambridge, MA: The M!T Press, 1 98fr.
M Si)i jman, S-, and SRi.N/Lm, , dfntinuouj and Disc-rete Si/^n^is and Systems, New York. NY: Pren-
LiceHdl, 19W-
Tav] or, K J-, Principiex of Signals and Systems. McGraw-Hill Series in Electrical and Computer
HngiTieenn^. New Y^rk. NY McGrEiw-HiIk 19^.
ZiFMHit, R H., Tw'VNiLH, W. Hr, and Fannen, D. R. Signals and Sy.\iems. Continwm.s. and Discrete.
2tid txl. Nlw York. NY: Mat mil Ian, i9Sy.

B.6 DISCRETE-TIME SIGNAL PROCESSING
BkL(iHA\i, O, b., Ihe Fast Fi^unef Tranafurm and sis Af^j?ii(oii<ms. Engl&*ood ClitTs, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 1988.
BcRHi.i,C, S.,M<.CinLAN, J. H., Qpi^VMitiM, A. V., PftHi^s.T W., Shaffr, R. W.. and St mii-iSLKK, 11. W. Cotnpuier-Jia^ed h'j;en ise^fiJr S'^nal Fnrcessm^ Uung MATLAB. En^lewiH>d C]]rfs, NJ:
Prentici^Han.riic, L994,
New CririLD, B,, and Rmji-k, Cr h/i..y Digital Pnycessing of Signals. Lmcolji Labyralory PLlblitiitt^J^i.^
Yrtrk,NY MtGraw-Hill, !%9.
Q^T^MHLJH, A. v.. and Schaffr, R W,, Digsml Signal FntrcaMnf^, Engtewood Cliffb. NJ. Pr*:nuce
Hall, 1975.
Opjitnhljn'. a. v.. and Sckaclr, R. W., DiMretif-Time Signal Processing. Englewood Cliffy IVJ
Prentice Hall, 1989.
t^^Lil\ A.,, and Lili^ B., Digital Signal Froi'i'isin;^. Theory Design and tmplemcnUiiion Nl-\v York, NY: JohnWil^y, 1976.
Pr^jakis, J G., and M.^Noi ai\[s, D. G,, Digital Signal Fryctrsstng^Prinapiei, Algo'-nhms, and Appliidtiaii\.:^\:il*id Bn^lcwood ClilTs. NJ: Premise HatI, 1Q96
Raikm u, Lr R., and Gold. B , Thc^trv and Appiication of Digital Signal Processing EngloiVortd
Cliffs, NJ. Premice Ha^l, 1975.
R R<>rlrts, a., and Mi i J.l^, C T. Digilat Signal Frocef-sing. ReadtTlg. MA: Addih^^n -Wesley, 19S7.
STftHM, R. D-, and Kjkk, D. E.^ First Principles afDi.\<rete Syait^ms and Digital Sif>tia^ Procesnng.
Addiiyr-Weskj SerJcs in Electrkai EZngiiiecmig. Reading, MA: Addison -Wes ley, i9SS. rttLfiiK, S. A.H iKtroducdon to DiJuretL'-Jitne Signal Frt?cessing. New York, NY: John Wiky, 1976

B.7 FILTER DESIGN
AMi¨NkHi, A,, Digital Filters, Analysis, Design, and Applications. 2nd ed. New York. JS'Y. McGraw-
Kilt. 199.^,
Chrj^uan, E., and Eisf-nm vnim,E.. Ftitrr Design Tables ijnd Graphs. Knightdalc, NC: Trinsmi.s.sion NsiworVs Intctnational , 1977.

Bibliography

'^^

HftMwiNC, R. W. Digital Fitters. 3rd td. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1989, Hiih'i SMAW. L. P.. and Al.llh, P. E , fnlmdaction to iht Theory and De^^ign of Active FiUcr^ New
York, NY: McGraw-Hill, i9^0.
P^RKs, T. W., and BuRsu-i, C. S., Digital fitter Design, New York, WY: John WJey, 1587, Vav V^LKENBURt], M. L-, Afldfog Filter Dmgti. New York, NY Hdt, Rinehait and Winston, 19S2. WnNfihRG, L., Network AT\alysis and Syntbeiii. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 1962.
Zv hfthv, A. I., Handbook of Filler Synthesis. New York, NY: John Wiley, 1967.

B.3 STATE-SPACE MODELS AND METHODS

Brockctt, R., Finite DtmÈnsii>mtl Linear Syifvms. New York, NV: John Wiley, l^Ta.

Chf.n, C. r., Linear System ThetiTj and Design. New York, NY: HoH, Rlnehart, and Winston, 1984
Cj^sl, C M., and FREDSmrK, DK. MoAeling and AnnJy^is of Dynamic Systems Boston, MA:

Houghton MiffliD, 1978

SC, GuHTA,

Transform and State Variabk Meih>ds in Unear Systems. New YoiV, NY: John Wile>,

1966.

KalLath, r. Linear Systems. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 19S0.
pr Ijlhg, L,, System Identification: Theory the User. Englewood Cliffs. NJ; Prentice Hall, 1987 LuENBERtiE, D. G., Introduction to Dynamic Systems: Theory, Models, ondApplkatiims. New Yorl:.
NY: John Wiley, 1979.
C N Za DEH , L. A. , and Dlmjeh , A . , Litiea r System Theory: The Stale Space Approach. New York, Y:
McGraw-Hill, 1963.

B.9 FEEDBACK AND CONTROL
Anqerson, B. D. O., and Moottt, J B., Optimal Control: Uiiear Quadratic Methods. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: PrcDtice Hail 1990,
D'azzo, J. J,, and Houpls, C. H.^ Unear Control System Analysis aitd Design: Cotiventiotwi and
Modem, 4th cd. NY McGraw-Hill, 1995,
DoftF, R. C, and Bishop, R. H., Modern Conlroi Systems. 7th ed. Reading, MA: Addison -Wesley
Publishing Company, 1995,
DovLt, J. C, Francis, B. A, and TANNEhEAim, A. R., Feedback Control Theory. New York, NY;
Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992. HosTErrtTi. G. H., Savant, Jr., C. J., and Stefan:, R. T, Design of Feedback Controt Systerm. 2nd
ed. Saanden, College Publishing, a Division of Holt, Rcinhait and Wia&ton, Inc., 1989.
Kuci, B. C, Automaiic Controt Systems. 7th ed. Englewood CUffs, NJ; Prentice Hall, 1995.
Ogata^ Hi., Modem Control Engineering. 2nd ed. Englewood Clif^, NJ: Prentice Hall. 1990.
OoATA, K., Discrete-7tmÈ Ctintivl Systems. 2nd ed. Ei^lewood Cliffs, NJ Prentice Hall, 1994. Raha/^IMi, J R., and FfLA;M£aiH, G. F, Sampled-Data Control Systemi^. New York, NY: McGraw
Hill, 1958.
JtoHHs, C. E,. Melsa^ J. L., and Schiiltz, D, G., Linear Control Systems. New York, NY: McGraw-
Hill, 1593.
VAcrARo^R. J., Digitat Control: A Stme-Space Approach. Nftw York, NY: McGraw HilU 1995.

926

Bibliography

B.10 COMMUNICATIONS
Bennett, W. R., fntroductum ti? Signai Transmission. Ntw York, NT: McGraw-Hill, 1970.
Blahut, R. E., Digiuxl Transmisshn of in/onnation. Reading, MA: Addison-Wtslc/ Publishing
CompaDj. t990.
fliAHin, R. ^., Algebraic Methodsfor Signal Frocessmg and Cominunications C{>ding. New York,
>4Y: Springer- Verlag, 1992.
Carlson, A. B., Communication Systems- An introdtiction to Signals and Noise tn Electrical Com-
mtmication. 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 19Se.
CfJt'CH^ 11, L. AV., Modern Ccjmmuninalion Sy^iems Pririciples and Applications Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1995.
Cover, T M., and Thomas, J. B., Elements of hfontiation Theory. N¨w York, NY: John Wiley and
Sons, Inc., 1991,
Gau.aoek, R, Mr, Information Theory and Reliabte Commumcaiion, New York, NY: John WiJcy
iind Sons, Inc., 1968,
Havkin, S.h Digital CommtmicatiotiSr Nev York, NY: John Wiley Sl Sons^ 1988
Jayant, N. S., and Noi.l., R, Digfta! Coding of ^veforms: Principle^ and Apphration.-i to Speech and Video. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Preiuice Hall, Inc., 1984,
Lathj, B, R, Modem Digiiai and Analog Communication Systems. 2nd ed. New York, JNY: HoJt,
Rjneharf and Winston, Inc., 1989.
Ve\, E. A., Sffid Mzs^utscHMiTT, D. G., Digital Comfnttfttcaiion. 2nd ed. Boston, MAr Kluwej Aca-
demic Publishers^ 1994.
PiitBLESn Jr., R Z., Commttnkation System Principles, Reading, MA: Addison -Wesley PubMsliing
Company^ 1976,
Proakjs, J. G,, Digital Communications. 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 1995
M pRO^Kis^ J. G. and S alijhi, , Communication Systems Engineering. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 1994.
RoDEN, M. S.,Anaiog and Digitid Commitnicaiion Sysiems. 4ih ed. Upper Saddle Eliver, NJ; Prentice Hall, Inc, 1996
Schwartz. M-, Irformation Transmission, Modulation, and Noise. 4Ui ed. New York, NY: McGraw-
Hill, 1990.
SiMDN, M. K,, el al.£ eds., Spreod Spectrum Communication Hatidbcfok. "Sitw, ed.. New York, NY:
MtGrav^'-Hill, 1994
Strehler, F. G., Introduction to Commifnication Systems. 3id td. AddisoD -Wesley Series in EJec-
trical Ejigine*nng, Reading. MA- Addison -Wesley, 1990. Talb, H,, and Schilling, D. L., Principles of Comfnanicatlon Systems. 2mJ ed. New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill, t9S6.
VrniftBi, A. J,, and Omura, J. K,, Principles ofDigital Communication andCoding New York, NY: McGraw Hill. 1979-
ZlIlMer, R. E. and TuAwrEft, Wr H., Principles o/Communicar^ru Syit^ms^ Moduiation, and Ni:>iser
4th ed. Bostoj], MA: Houghton Mifflin Co,, 1995.

B. 1 1 MULTIOIMENSIONAL SIGNAU IMAGE, AND VIDEO PROCESSING
BraceweUh R, N,, Two-Dimensional Imaging. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1995.
CASTUJMArJ. K, R., Digital Image Processing. Englewood Cliffy. NJ; Prentice Hall Inc., 1 996,

Bibliography

927

Dlixjeon, D. E,, MerseKÈau, R. MMuttidimensionat Digitai Signal Processing, EDglewood Cliffe,
NJ: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1984.
GoNZAJJEZt R. C, andWcxjoSt R. E., Digitai Ittuige Processing. Reading., MA; Addison -'Wesley,
1993.
Jmh, a. K.. FutidameT^als ojDigital fmage Pmcessittg. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice HaJK 1989. LiH> J, S,, T^o-Dimensivtjat Sigttiti and Jttiage Processing. Englewood Cliffs, NJ. Prentice Hall
Inc.. 1990.
Neihavall, a. N., aod Hajjkell^ B. G., Digital Pictures: Representation, Compression, and Stan-
^Tds. 2nd ed New York, NY: Plenum Press, 1995. Pratt, W, K., Digitai image Processing, 2nd ed. New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons. 1991
Tui^AL.F". A. M., Digital Video Processing. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, inc., 1995.

BJ2 SPEECH PjrOCfSSINC

Driler, J R,^ PftOA£iis, J. G,, and H^MSi:r<, J. H. L., Discrete-Jlme Processing of Speech Signals.
Upper Saddle Riv^r. NJ: Prentict Hall, 1 987.

Kliun, W. Bm and P.. K. K., Speech Coding and Synthesis. AtnstenUm; Elsevier, 1995,

W; LiM, J. S.£ ed.. Speech Enfamcement. Englewood ClifFs£

Prentice HaJl, 1983.

MAkKiii., J. D.£ and Gkay, A. H., Linear Prediction cf Speecfi. New York, NY: Springer- Vsrlag,

197G.

RMUNEft, L, St,i aiid JuAhtc, B.-H., Fund^imentais ^if Speech Recognition, Engkwood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1993.

RAEiHiiR, L. R.p and ScbiAFER, R. W.^ Digital Processing of Speech Signals. Englewood Cliffs^ NJ'
Prentice Hall, 1978.

B, f 3 MUtTJRATE AND MULTJRESOLUTION SfGlMAL ANALYSIS
AiwM5ij, A. N., and Hmjdad, R. X.^Muhiie solution Signal Decomposition: Transforms, Sabtands and Wavelets. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, Inc., 1992
Chli, C, K., An Introduction to Wavelets. San Diego, CA: Academic Press Inc,, 1992.
Chochiere, R. E., and RABrNEtt, L. R., Multirate Signal Processing. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prenbce HalU 1983,
DrtLBtt hieSh l.T Ten Lectures on Wavefets. CBM5-NSF Series on AppUed Maihemaiics, Ptltladel-
pliia: SIAM, 1992.
Malvah, H. S., Sigrtaf processing with Lapped Transforms, NDrwt>od, MA: Artcch House, 1992.
VAiD-tAHATHAK, P. R. MvlHrate Systems atui Filter B<mh. Ei^lewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentioc Hall, Inc.,
1993
Vftterli, M., and fcov^ctvic, J., Wavel^tj and Suhhaml Coding. EnglewcFod Cliffs, NJ; Prentice
Hall, Inc,, 1995.
WoFJ^EL^, G. W,, Signal Processing with Fractals: A Wcavtet-BasedApproachMppcr Caddie River,
NJ: Prentice HalL Inc., 1996.
B. 14 RANDOM SJGNALS AND STA7TSTICAL SFGNAL PROCESSfNG
B.f4. 1 Bask PfobabiJr^
Drake, A- W., Fundamentals ofApplied Prohifbtlity Theory. New Y&rk, NY: McGraw Hill, 1967. Ros^, S., fntroductjon fif Probability Modf^. 5th ed. Bo&toa£ MA; Academic Press, 1993.

.

9Z&

BibJicgraphv

B.I 4,2 Stochastic Processes, Detection and Estimation

Kay, S. M.h Fuft^mentats of Statistical Signal Processing: Estimation Theory. Engle wood Cliffs.
NJ: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1993.

Leon-Gahcia, a., Probability and Random Proc^ss^s for Electrical Engineering. 2nded Reading,
MAl Addison -Wesley Publishing Co., 1994.

New Papoules, a., Pnobahility, Randfjtn Vt^riable.^, end Slo<:ln3Slic Processes, 3nl ed.

York, NY:

McGraw-m]lJ99t.

Peebles, Jr., P. Z., ProbabiUty, Random Variables, and Random SignaS Principles, 3rd ed. New
York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 1993,

PfiRAT, Br, Digital processing of Random Signals: Theory and Methods. Englewood ClilTs, NJ:
Prentice Hall. Inc., 1994.

TiiLHiULH, C, W., Discrete Random Signals and Statistical Signal Processing. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:

Prentice Hall, Inc., 1992.

Van Trees, H. L., Detection, Ejftimation, and Modulation Theory: Part 7, Ntw Yoirk, NY: John Wdey and Sons. Tnc , t96R.

B. 1 S NONUNEAR AND TIMEVARVING SYSTEMS

Chua, L. O.. fntr^HlufSion to I^onlinear fretwork Theory. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill^ 1 9*9. D'AyfiELO, H., Linear Time-Varying Systems: Analysis and Synthesis. Boston, MA: Aliyn and Ba-
con, 1970.

G&AMAMjD,, and McRuer, D.., Analysis ofNonlinear Contmi Syxtcm:^. New Yort, NY: Dover, 197 J

HJLLBt^H^, R. C, ChaoA and Nonlinear Dynamics: An Introduction for Scientists and Engineers

New NY York,

Ojtfftnl IJtilversily PrtS^, 1994.

Khmji , H, K., H<}nlineaT Systems. New Yort, NY: Macmill^ PiLblishing Company, 1992.

Lu-btKLTz, S..^ Sttxbility of ffoniinear Control Systems. Mattiematicj; in Science and Engineering,
no. 13. New York, NfY: Academic Press, 1965.

H.ICHARIM, J. A, Anolv.tijf of PerifjJically Time-Varying Systems r New York, NV: Spr.nger-Verlag,
I9S3.

Stroo ^77,5,5,.

Nonlinea r

Dynam \cs

and

Chaos .

Reading,

MA:

Addison -Wesley

Publish^ tig

Com-

pany, 1994,

VuiYAiAObK^ M., Nonlinear Systems Analysis. 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs^ NJ: Pienlice Hal!, 1993.

B. ! 6 OTWER APPLICATJONS AND ADVANCED TOPICS
BoK, G. E. P., and Jf^jkins, Gr Mr, Time Series Attalysis: Forecasting and ControL Rt^v, oJ. Èan FranciscoX.^: Holden-Day, 1976.
H/^ HILTON. J. D., Time Series Analysis. Princeton, NJ' Princeton Oniversity Prei^s- 1994,
Havkjn. S., Adaptive Filter Theory. 2nd ed. EnglewMd Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1991.
Herman, G. T., Image Pecanstruciionfrfjm Frojections. New York, NY: Academic Press. 19S0.
Johnson, D. H. andDltx^fvON. D. "E.. Array Signal Processing: Concepts arui Techniques. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentict Hall, Inc., 1993.
Kak, a. C, and Slamey, M., Principles ofComputerized Tomography. Englewood Cliffs, NJ Fhnen-
tice Hall, 1989

J

Bibliography

929

Kav, S. M,, Modern Spectral Extut^Qiion; Theory iindAppiitiition^ EngleA'OCKl CJiffs., NJj Prentice Hall, WRS.
M'mjviK,, A., Medicai Irrutginf^ Svit^ms. Engle*[jt*d Cliffs^ NJ: Prenuce Hall, I9fl3. Marple, Jk.j S. L., Digital Sp^clrai Analysis with Appiications. Englewood ClifT&, NJ. Prentice Hall^
J 987. OppENiiiiCH, A. V.^ c6.., AppUiiitiiJtu i>f Oigiial Signal Prrfc^i.^ing RnglewN^od Cliff'^, UJ' Prentice
A RfifiiNsnN.E ,(^r fl] . GfvjipMvti^ aL^j^irn/ Pror^Tsm^ Englcwood Cliffs, NJ Prentice flail, J986.
V^H TkfFS., H- L., Di't^rriofl; Estttmition. and Modulation Theory; Purr III: Rador-Sonar Signal Prvce^-fing ar\d Gaussian Signals in Noise. New York, NY: John Wiley, 197
Wirjho^, H., ari(3 STi-Awrvs, S. D,, Adaptive Signal Processing. Englewood Cliffs* NJ: Prentice Hall,
1985.

ANSWERS
931

1

932

Ansvbffics

Chapter 1 Answers

1.1. -0.5^ -0.5, / -/ j\} i-j.1 + j,] -J,^ 'j

1,2. 5e-'-\ 2^-'^, 3e~^'^^.f-^^^^. Jle^'^''^. 2e~-''^^\ J^e^'^^^, ,jw: ^-i^ni

(a) P. - 0.È.. \

^ <b) i'.. = 1,È^ -

- = (c> />:,

1, È^

¨.

lA. (a) ¨ < 1 and n > 7 <d) rt < -2 and n > 4

< (b) n -6 and rt >
> (e) ra =: -6 and n

< (c) ¨ -4 and w ^"^ 2

> 1.5, (a) f

-2

> (b> r -1

(c) r > -2

< (d) f

1

< (e) r 9

(a> No CbJ No (c) Yes

> 1,7. (a) \n\ 3

(b) dl f

< ^ (c) |/t|

-^ 3, |rt|

^ (d) |r| -^

- - - a - 1.8, (a) /I

2, fl

0, ftt

<^

TT

<c> /I = l,fl = l,w = 3,^ = ?

= - (b) A

l.fl

= = 0,t^

3, 4p

(1

id) A = \,a = Zcj = 100, <^ = ^

r 1.9, (a)

=
f

(d> ^ A'' 10

(b) Not periodic (e) Nyt periodic

(c) iV - 2

1.10.

j,n. 35

M 1,12.

= -\,nu = -3

1.13. 4

1.14. /I] - 3./i - 0,^2 ^ -3,fi - 1 I.IS. (a) y[n] = 2x[n - 2] + 5j[n - 31 f 2x[n - 4]

1.16. (a) No

Cb)

(c) No

1.17. (a) No;e.g.,>C-7r) = j;([))

(b) Yes

1.18. (a) Yes

(b) Ye?,

C ^ (c)

(2rto + 1)^

(b) No

1.19. (a) Linear, not time invariant

(c) Linear, time invariant

1.20, (a) cos(30

(b> cos(3i - I)

(b) Nfit linear, ti rue invariant (d) Linear, not time invariant

Chapter 2 Answers

+ + 2.1, (a> yiifl] - 26[rt+ 1] + 4S[rt] 2S[n - IJ 25tfl - 2| - 25[n - 4]

(b) y2[ni = yiln + 2]

(c) y^[n] = yj^j

2.2, A = 1} - 9, B = n + 3

2.3, 2Ll-:!r'"Vl"l

n - 6,

24- = 2.4, v[n]

6,
<

rt.

0,

7 i^ n i^ 1
12 ^ n ^ 18 19 ^ n ^ 23
otherwise

Answers

2.5

1 2'

- '^

f*

1.7 <a) utn - 21 - w[n - 6]

(b) u[n - 4] - w[n - 8]

- (d) >[¨J - 2u[n] - d[it\

- 6[fi

[]

= 2.8, }iT)

r + 3,
M' 4,
2-2?,

-2<t^-l

-] <t ^0

< ^ I

1

{k) No

13 A ^ t^5.B ^ t-4
t,
2.10, (ft) yiO = { r+¨-t,
0,

^T ^a
1 ==,== 1+^
otherwise

(b) a = 1

2.11,

3</ ^ 5
5 < ? ^ =t

(b) gU) = e-^*'-^^u(t - ^) - e ^*'-^^u{S-5)

2J2,

] -F ^

2,13. (a) A = I

2,14.

gM <b>

= S[n\-iS[£- 1]

= (c) g{i)

2.15,

2.16. (a) True

[b> False <c) True (d) True

2.17, (a) yit} = ^-^ie*-^'^^^^' -e-^']iAii)

(b) yit) = {\e-Hi^os3t + iym3r)--'^']u(j)

2.18,

2.19.

2.20, (a) 1

(bl

(c)

Chapter 3 Answers
3.1, x(0 =4cos(fO + 8cos<?^iirf -H f)

933

934

Answers

3.6. (a) j:5<0. J^a)

(b> JC2(0

3.7, at =

k =0

3.S-

3,9, flo = 3, È1, = 1-2^02 = -l,a^ = 1 +2>

3,10, oo = 0, u- !

=

-;, a-2

=

-2j.a

=
J

-3;

3.11.
3J2, f; ^ 6 for all k 3.13. y{0 =

3.14.

X15. |jt|>8
3,16, {¨)

(b> smt^fl + 5)

(c) D

3.17. Ai and ^3 are not LTl.

3.1B, 5] and A'j are not LTl.

^ m 3.19. (a)

+ y<0 =

(b) W(ja.) = (i^>

^ 3.20. (¨)

+ ^^^><0 = ^(0

HiJ^) fh)

= 7) ( IH- J(tf

w'

(C) -COS/

Chapter 4 Answers

4.1. (a) 2 + Jw

4*"-^

4.2. (a) 2co'i<tt

(b) -2jsm2<i>

- 4J. (a> ^[^^'^''^6(ui 27r) - ^->'^S(6J + 27r)]

- + + (b> 27rg(w) + fl'[eJ'"'*S(tt^ 67r) e-J'^^Hft* 67r)|
-^^ 4.4, (a) H-cos4irf tb>

^4 4.5. ^(;) = -^imlMÈ^p^, =

I for nonzero integers t

4h6. <aj Xi(yai) - 2X(-;w)C0$a> (c> X3(/<U) = "M^tf->"X(JW)

(b) ^lO) = le-^^Xij"^)

4.7. (a) neither* neither <d) real^¨ven
4,8* <a) ^^+^fi(ÈLi)

(b) imaginaiy, odd
(b) ^^^^

(c) imaginary, neither

4,9. 4.10.

(0)

ytU'

;Èih

^'

(a)

K{j(a)

= i

-jilTT,

0,

[J

^ ^ jta'^

-2 ^ w <

^iii<2

otherwise

Jilt
(b) A = ji,

£

Aflswers

4.11. 4,12.
4J3, (a) Na
4.14.

(b) Yes

^c^ Ye*

i 4.16. (a) g{i) = ^

S(/ - ^)

(b) X(>Q,) =

4,
0,

^ |ft£[

1

1< ^1 ^ 4

4.17. (a) Palse

(b) True

-t
4.18, H.t) - {

4J 9,

8 0.
^ ^-4r,

< If I

1

^ 1

kl :È 5

< < 5
¨'

Ifj

7

otherwise

4,20. ^(0 = ^*'^^^simf r)w<r>

Chapter 5 Ans^A/er5

5.1. <a)

f^

a-75^-.r*^
(b)

5,2, <¨) 2cosw (b) 2ysin(2w)
~ ~ S3. (a) ^{f^'^^-^;i(^ f ^ e-J^^^5<w + f

5.4. (a> x^{n\ = 1 +cos(frt)

<b) -4^^

5.5.
5,6. (a) Xiie^'^) = {2cosw)-Ë(*->^)

(b) X^(eJ^) = Cft4X(e>^))

5.7. (a) imaginary, neither

<b) reaJ, 4?dd

5.8,

1,

TM ^ -2

f

(c) real, tieither

S3. x\t{\ ^ -6[n+ 2] + 6[n + l]+^[n]
5.10, A = 2 5,11. a = tr
5.12.
5.13,
5,14, h[n\ = ^S[n]- ^S\n-2]

935

936

5.16. (a) a = i

(b) N = 4

(t) No

5.18. a, ^ 1(^)1^1
5.19. (a) H{ef'^) =
(b) h[n] = J(|ri.[/£J + |(-}ruf¨J

Ansv^rs

Chapter 6 Answers

6.h (a> A - \HiJato)\

Ob) fo = -^^f^

^ + <fl<e^'^^)

-rto(Èt>o> Stj-A foj some integer ^.

^ 6,3. (a)

=1

> > (b) T(u>)

for (u

6,4. (a) 2cos(|n-7r) (b) 2sin(^n-^)

6.5. (^) g(f) = 2co^{2(i>j)

(b) more concentraied

6,6, (£) sin] = (-ir

fb) more concentrated

6,7. (a) 1,000 Hz and 3,000 Hz (b) 800 Hz and 3,200 Hz

-- ^ ^ 6.8. IT iiift

tii

TT

6-9. Final value = 2/5, /c = 2/5 sec r "2a
^ 6.10, (a) 20logi^ |//0'o>)| < 20Iogio(Qt),
[32,

w^OJ
w 0.1 <È: <È: 40
o^ :^ 40

a>> 20log]o|^(£|

20.
-201og,o(ft>) + 6,
-28,

cu <^ 0.2
0.2 ^:^ ^r 50 ^ :3> 50

6.11, (a> 20 log,o !//(;¨; )1

20,
-201og,o<a>)+ 14,
-401og,(/t^) + 4a

0.5 ^w ^50
cu ^S' 50

0,
(b) 201cgEy|//(£|-H^ -40bg]^Q>, -20logi(jw - 34,

<o <s: 1
1 <^<t> <^ 50
<Mi:^ 50

6,12,

6J3. (a) not unique (b) unique

6.14*

Hf\J* ^}'

=

0.2 X

io-^Usi^^!^mM
(.rtu -1-0.2.1-

Answers

6.15. (£) cridcallj damped (c) overdamped

(b) underdamped (d) underdamped

U[n-U 6,16. y[n] +

= lx[n)

6.17. (a) oscillatory

(b) noposcillatoiy

6J8. ho

6.19. R ^ 2 /^

937

Chapter 7 Answers

7,L If.) >5H0O07r I
7.2. (a)and(c)

73. (a) 8,000?r <b) S^OOOtt (c) I6,0ai7r

7.4. (a) iiiQ

(b) o>Q

(c> 2wfl

(d) ^Ja^n

7,5. |//0)[ -
0,

T"

"JT

7,6.

^ < ^ ^HUw) "^^ where

,

othen^'rise'

^

< w, ^

- ^, 2lF

r

2'

=

'^J

'

7,7,

7,8- (a) Yes

0,

X (b) ^(n =

a;^^-'^'^', whereas =

i- -4

-4 ^ jt ^ -I

7,9.

7,10. (a) False

{\>) True

{c> True

J 7 I, (a) X^ijiii) is real <b) Mas;x,(jtuH = 0.5 x 10 ^
(c) X^(/a>> = Ofor|w| > l,50(hr
(d> X,0¨j) = Xdjitif - ZOOOtt)) for

^ 7.12, JÈij|

750-17

^ w :^ ZOOOir

7.13.

7.14,

N 7.15,

=2

7,16. x[n] =AeA-.mf

7.17. Ideal luwpa^b filter with cutoff frequency -rr/Z and passband gain of unity

7.18, Ide^I lowpaijs filler with cutoff frequency Tr/4 and pa.s$band gain of 2,

7,19. (a) y[n\ = ^^^^^^

7.20. (a) Yes

(b) No

(b) )1¨J = ^5[flj

938

Chapter 8 Answers

m(0 = ^^-^^'

8J, (a) No constraint necessary

= 8J. yit) {\

8A = y(r) sin2007rr

-- 8,5, K¨

3

(b) 1^,5 > KOOOtt

s,s, ^ = 4 8.7. WD = 2titctA - 2

8.a. (a) Yes (h) Yes, jc(0 = {y{t)smatct}*^^^

8.9. (a> |w| > 2wf

- A = (b> tiif)

<0(,

2

^ (a) ;f(;w) = Oforitu] 1,000^ (b) tj^ ^ I^OOOttM = 4

SJL f (a)

s ^ - |to|

3at.
2

.Gain

I

(b) A = 2\ail4f = <^i

A 8,12.

= 0.5 >^ 10"^

8.13. (a) p<0) - i^

=0 (b> p(kT,)

8J4. 8.15. Èt>o " 8J6i

= and (Oa

ir

3fl

5^

8.17.

8.1£.

N 8.19,

= 20

-^<0 0<; <ri :^ J
/ -J

X 8.20. Pbt] -

S[^ - 2jt]

Chapter 9 Answers

9.1. (a) fr>-5
(d) no va]ue of ir

<b) o" < -5

< (e) |"-|

5

-£ ¨ (c)

:^ ^r :^

< (f) <r 5

> 9.2. (a) ^^,(}l^fj} -5 (b) A - -Lffl = -l,m^j} < -5

9.3. ffl*{^} - 3, tfm^jS} arbitrary

9.4: I +2j,] -2j.(R^s}< 1

9j, (a> 1,1

(b) 0,1

(c) 1,0

9.6, (a) no 9.7. 4

(b) yes

<c) no

<d) yes

9.S. two sided
= 9.9. x(t) 4e "^'uiO - 2e-^'uiO

Answers

Answers

9,10. (a) lowpa^ss

(b) bandpass

(c) highpass

9,lh 1^0-^)1 = 1

(a) not consistent

(h) consistent

(c) consistent

9A3.

9J4.

9,15.

^ 10^ 3^ 9.16. (a) 2

9.17,

-,

> (b> tr + leyO) = llx[t) +

9,18, (a) H{s)= -^,fefj}>-i

(b) LowpasA

(c) /^(.O = ^rrrcTTITT- f^^^> =^ -0.0005
(d) Bandpass

9.19. (a) ^,fR^4> -2

(b) l + ^,fMs}> -2

Cc) + ^.(H*M>-2 J1-4
9.20. (a) e~'u[t)-e~^'u{0
(b) ^-^Mf/)

^39

Chapter 10 Answers

> 10,1, {a> \z\

{

102.

< (b> \z}

1

> (c) 1^1

1

< < (d) ^

|;|

2

= 10h3, \a

2, no arbitrary

< 10,4. poles at:: = ^^-^"'^.ROC; |^|

^

10^. (a) IJ

fb) 2.0

(c) 1,2

10-6, (a) No

ib\ No

(c) Yes

(d) Yes

1<£,7. 3

10.8, two aided

10.9.

10.10. (a) x[Q] = 1.411 = i>42] = -I

(b) x[0] = 3,4^1] = -6,:^[-21 - 18

10,11. x[n] = (ir.

^n^9

Of

otherwise

10.12. (a) highpass

(h) lowpass

(c) bandpass

- > 10.13, (a) G{z) = 1

^-*; \z\

(b) Xiz) = > jff^; \z\

(^^)^ 10,14, (a) no - 2

(b> G{z) =

940

Answers

10.16. (a) NotcaiisaJ

(b) Causal

(c> Not^:ausal

10.17, <a) Yes

(b) Yes

10.1S. (a> y[n]- \y[n- \] Ë ^y[ri - 2] - x[n] - 6x[n - - + 1| Sx\_n 2]
(b) Yei

--I iai9. (a) ^,u) -=

z>

(*>> A^lUf --2,Al}z

ia20. (a) -( -!)"¨[¨]

Chapter 1 1 Answers
_^ JM
IIJ

^< 11.3 .

-J

llA

11^.

11.6,
11.7. ^ > -6
|]^. -3 <t <0

1L9. No, root locus stays on real ajLis
1110. Double pole at i' = - 1 , double zerti at i = ]
IIJI. < jt< I4 ihn. Po[e and zeia positions aliemme on Lhe real axisi

11.13, UnstaWeforall AT

11.14. (aj

(b) 1

ILIS. a:> -I

11.16,

11.17. -1 < ^ <4

<K II.IS, -}

<]

11.19, Unstable
IIJO, Gain margin is infinite, phase margin is 2 tan"' ^2

Index

Absolutelj sutrunable impulse response, 113
AbfifiJutel^ integrable impulse response, 114
Accumulation property discrete-time Fourier series, 221
discretÈ-time Fourier transform,
375-76 unilateral z transform, 793 AccumulatOFT 44 Acoustic feedback. 830-32, 855 Adders in block diagrams, 125, 126 AdditivLty property, 53 Aliasing, 527-34 All-pass systems, 430, 498, 681^82
AM, See Ampllcude modulation fAM)
Amplifier choppfif, 652
operational, S21, 896-^7 Amplitude modulation (AM), 236^37.
322, 324, 583 pulse-Crain carrier, 60i-4, 605 sinusoidal, 583^87
complex exponential carrier, 583-85 demodulation for, 587^94 discr&tc-time, 619-23
frequency-division multiplexing
(FDM) using, 594-97
single-sideband, 597-601 sinusoidal carrier, 585-S7 Amplitude-scaling faLitor, 483 Analog- to-digital (A-to-D)
converter, 535

Analysis et^oation continuous-time Fourier series, 191 fjontinuous-lime Fpunef transform, 288 discrete-time Fourier series, 213 discrete-time Fcjurier transform^ 361, 390
Angle criterion, 836-40
Angle modulation, 611-13 Angle (phase) of complejc number, 71 Anticausality, 695 Aperiodic convoludon, 222 Aperiodic signal, 12, 180
continuous-time Fourier transform for, 285-85
discrete-time Fourier transform for,
359-62 Associative property of LTl systems,
107-8 Audio systems
feedback in, 830-32, 855 frequeficy-shjq>ing filters in, 232 Autocorrelation functiotis^ 65, 168,
170-72, 738 Automobile suspension system, analysis
of, 473^76 Average, weighted, 245 Averaging system^ noncausal, 47
Band-hmitcd input signals, 541 Band-limited interpolation, 523-24 Bandpass filters, 237-38, 326 B^dpass- sampling techniques, 564-65

941

942
Bandpass signal, 564-65 Bandwidth of an LTl system, 352-53 Bartlett Ctriangular) window, 421
Bernoulli, D., 178 Bilateral Laplace transform. See Lapiace
transfomi
Bilinear transformalion, 814-15 Bil, 610 Block diagrani{s>, 42
cascade-foTm, 712. 713, 787-89 causal LTl systems . 708-13,
784-89 direct-form, 712, 713, 7S7-89 first order systems described by
differentia and difference equations, 124-27
paralld-form. 712, 713. 787^9
Bode plots, 436-39 automobile suspension system, 475
rational frequencv responses,
456-60
Break frequency^ 4,^0 Butterworth filters, 446-47, 505, 703-6
Capacitor, 44
Carrier frequency^ 584 Carrier signal, 583 Cartesian (rectangular) form for complex
number, 71 Cascade-form block diagrams^ 712, 713,
787-89
Cascade (series) interconnection, 42
Causal LTl systetns, 46-48, 112-13, 116-27
block diagmm representations for, 708-13,784-89
first-order systetns, 124-27 Laplace transfoim for, 693-95, 697 ^-tran^form for, 776-77 Channel equalization, 609-10 "Chirp** cransform aJgorithra, 651 Chopper amplifier 652 Circle, unit, 743 Circuit, quality of, 456 Closed-loop ftystem, 818 Closed-loop poles. 834-36

Index
Closed-loop system function, 820
Coefficient multaplier, 125, 126
Coefficients, Fourier series. Set* Founcr
series coefficients
Oimmunications sysieiiK, 582-653
amplitude modulation with pulse-train carrier, 601-4, 605
discrete-time modulation, 619-23 pulse-amplitude modulation, 604-10
digital, 610 intersynibol interferetM;e in, 607-10
sinusoidal amplitude modulation, 583-87
with complete exponential carrier,
5&3-a5 demodulation for, 587-94 discrete-time, 619-23
frequency-divisioti multiplexing
<FDM) using, 594-97
single-sjdeband, 597-601 sinusoidal earner, 585-87
sinusoidal frequency modulation, 583,
611-19 narrowband, 613-15 periodic square-wave modulating
Signal, 617-19 wideband, 615-17 Commutative property of LTl systems,
104
Compensadon for nonid&al elements, 821-22
Complex conjugate, 72 Complex exponent] al(s)
discrete-time, periodicity properties
of, 25-30 general, 20-21
harmonically relatesd, 19 linear combinations of harmonically
related. See Fourier series LTl system response to, 1 82-86,
226-31 periodic, 186 sinusoidal amplitude mixlulation and,
583-85.
Complex exponential signals, general, 24-25

1

fndex
Con\plcx numbers, 71 ConditionaUy stable systems. 892 Conjugate symmetry, 204-5, 206, 221,
303-6, 375 Conjugation property
contitiuous-tiine Fourier series,
204^5, 206 contmuous-tiine Fourier transform,
303^6
discrete- time Fouriti aeries, 221 discrete-time Fourier transform, 375 Laplate transform, 6S7
unilateral, 717 ^-transform, 770
unilateraJ, 7^3 Constai^ts, lime, 44 S
dominant, 500-501 Continuous-time signals
energy arul po^Jver of* 5-7 exairples and mathematical
representation of, 1-5
sampling of, 4
Continuous-time systems, 448-60 Bode plots for rational frequency
responses and, 456-6(1
examples of, 39-4 first-order, 448-51 intorconnectioEis of, 41-43 second- order 451--56
Condnuous-to-discjete-time corversio'n, 535
Convergence. 5^^ aiso Region of convergence
continuous-time Fourier series, 195-201
continuous-ttme Fourier transform,
289-90 distrete-time Fourier series, 2 J 9-21
discrete-time Fourier transform,
366-61 Convoludon
aperiodic, 222 associative property of, 107-8 commutative property of, 104 defining continuous-time unit impulse
function through, 131-32

943
distributive property of, 104-6
operation of, 79, B5 periodic, 222, 389-90 Convolution integral, 90-102 evaluadng, 97-102 Convolution property continuous-lime Fourier scries, 206 continuous-time Fotirier transform*
314-22
discrete-time Fourier series,
221,222
discrete-dme Fourier transform,
3¨2-S8 Laplace transfonti, 687-88
unilateral, 717^18 z transform, 770-72
unilateral, 793-94 Convolution sum. 75-90, 384-86
evaluating, 81-M
Correlation function, 65
Critically damped systems, 453, 467
Ctoss-correlation functions^ 65,
168, 170 Cutoff frequencies, 237
Damped sinusoids, 21 Damping ratio, 452-53
dc offset, 207 dc sequences 224 Deadbeal feedback, 907 Decibels <dB), 232, 233, 437 I>ectmation, 549-55 Degenerative (negative) feedbacks
822, 831-32 Delay, 44
group, 430-36 half-sample, 543-45 unit, 125 Delay lime, 406 DcmodulatiOQ, 585 defined, 5*3
sinusoidal amplitude modulation, 587-^94
asynchronotJSj 590-94 discrete-time, 622 synchronous, 5S7-9C

944

Index

EHffcrenc^ equations discrete- time filters described by,
244-49 first-order recursive, 244-45 nonrecursive^ 245-49
linear constant-coefficient. Sec Linear
constant-coefficient difference equations Differencing property
discrcte-tLme Fourier series. 222-23
discrete-time Fourier transform^
375-76 ^-transform, 775
unilateral, 793 Differential equations
continuouS'time filters described by,
239^44
RC htghpaifi filter. 241-44
ffC loMypast filter, 239-41 linear constant-coefficient. See Linear
constant-coefficient differential equations
Differentiating filters
continuous-time, 2,12-34, 235 discrete-time, 541-43
Differentiation
s domain, 6Sa-90, 717 time-domain, 688, 717 z domain, 772, 793
Dififerentiatjon property
contirtuouS'time Fourier series, 206
continuous-time Fourier transform,
306-8 discrete-time Fourier transform, 380
Differentiator
block diagram representation of, 1 26 digital, 541-43 Digital-to-analog (D-tg-A) converter, 535
Direct Form I realization, 161-63 Direct Form JI realization, 161-53
Direct-foim block diagrams, 712, 713.
787-89
DiricWet, RL,, l&O
Dirichlet conditions, 197--200, 290. 316 Discontinuities, 19S-2O0 Discrete Foxier transforna (DFT) for
finite-duration f^ignals, 417-18

Discrete-time Fourier series pair. 213 Discrete-time LTl filters, 234-36 Discrete-rime modulation, 619-23
Discrete-time nonreciu-sive filters,
476-82
Discrete-time signals, 211
energy and power of, 5-7 examples and nnathematical
representation of. 1-5 ssuBplirtg of, 545-55
decimation and interpolation. 549-55
impulse train, 545-49 Discrete-time systems, 46:-72
first-order. 461-65 secotid-order, 465-72
Discrete-rime to continuous-time conversion, 535
Dispersion, 433
Distortion
magnitude and phase, 428 quadrature, 636
Distribution theory, 36, 136 Distributive property of LTl systems.
104-6 Dominant time constant, 500-501 Double-sideband modulation (DSB), 598 DownsampUng^ 551
Duality continuous-time Fourier transform.
295, 309-11.322 dii^cnete-time Founer transfoim, 390-96
between discrete-lime Fourier transform and continuous-time Fourier series, 395-96
EobtN, 737 Eigenfunctions, 183-84. 272 Eigenvalue, 183, 272 Elliptic filters, 446''47 Encirclement property, 847- 5 U Energy -density spectmm. 3lZ, 349, 381 Energy of signals, 5-7 Envelope detector, 591, 592 Envelope function, 285 Equalization, 649
channel, 609-10

^

index
Equalizer, zero-force, 649 Equalizer circuits, 232, 233
EuLet, L., 178 Eiiler's relation* 71
Even signals, 13-14 continuous-tinic Fourier series, 206
discrete-time Ffjuriet serie'** 221
Expon&ntLal&. 5^^ Complex
exponential (s)
Exponential signals, 14-30 mnlinuouS'lime complex. 15-21 discrete-time complex, 21-30
real, 22. 23
Extension pmbJems, 137
Fast Fourier transform (FFT), 182,418 feedback. See also Linear fccdhack
systetns applications of, 820--32
angular position of telescope,
816-18 aiidio, S30~32, 855
compensation for nonideal elemeints, S21-22
inverse system design, 820-21 inverted pondulum. 818-19 population dynamics, 824-26 sampled-data systems, 826-28
stabilization of unstable systems,
823-26 tracking systems. 828-30 clt>sed-lo<jp poles, 836-38 deadbeat, 907 degenerative {negative), 822, 831-32 deAtabilization caused by, 830-32 positive (Kgenerative), S3 1-32 proportional, 823 proportionil-plus-derivative, 824 Type f, 906 Feedback interconnection, 43 Feedback padi, system functitm of, S20 Filter(s), 231-50 Butterwortii, 446-47, 505, 703-6 continuous- time described by
J
differential equations, 239-44
RC highpass filter, 241^44 RC lowpass filter 239-41

945
eondnuous-tirie differentiating
232-34,235,541 discrete-time, described by difference
equations^ 244-49 first-order recursive, 244-45 nonie cursive, 245-49 ellipdc, 446-47
finite impulse response <FIR), 122
discrete-time, 476-82
linear-phase, causal, symractfic,
579-80 frequency -selective, 231, 236-39.
318,423 bandpass, 237-38, 326 highpass, 237-38, 241-44,
374-75, 387 ideal, 237-39, 439-^44
lowpass. 237, 318, 32K22, 374-75,
384, 440, 442, 443 time-domain propertieii of ideal,
439-44
with variable center frequency,
325^27 frequency-shaping, 231, 232--36
differentiating filters, 232-34, 235 discrete-time LTI filters, 234-36 infinite impulse response (JIR),
123, 476 maiched, 170-72, 2"5 moving-averagp, 476-82 noaideal, 444-47 Filtering, defined. 231 Final-value theorem, 690-91
Finite-duradon signaJs, discrete Foiirier
transform for, 417-18 F'inJte impulse response (FIR) filters, 122
discrete time, 245-49, 476 82
linear-phase, caudal, s-yrninetric,
579-80
Finite sum formula, 73
First difference* 111. Si'e also Differencing property
First harmonic components, 187 First-wder continuous -dme systems,
448-51
First-order discrete- time systems,
461-65

1

S

946

Index

First-order recursive discrete-time filters,
244-45
Forced response, 118 ForwBid path, system function of, 820 Fourier, Jean Baptiste Joseph, 179-81 Fourier series, 177-283. See also
Filter(s)
continuous- time, 186-21 analysis equation of, 191 conjugation and conjugate symmeti^ of, 204--5 convergence of^ 19S-201 determination of. 190-95 Dirichlet conditions, 197-200 duality between discrete-time
Fourier transform atid, 395-%
examples, 205-11 Gibbs phenomenon, 2130-201, 219 linear cotnbmations of harmonically
related complex exponentials, 186-90 linearity property of, 202 multiplication property of, 204 Parseval's relation for, 205, 306 square wave, 193-95, 200, 201, 209,218^19
synthesis equation of, 191
labJe of properties, 206 time reversal. property of, 203 lime scaling property of, 204 lime shifting property of, 202-3 discrete-times 211-26 dnalyiis equation of, 213 convergence of, 219-21 iieteTTnjnation of, 212-21
lirst -difference property of,
222-23 linear combinations of harmonically
related complex exponentials, 211-12 multiplication property of, 222 Parseval's relation for, 223 square wave. 219-20, 224 synthesis equation of, 213 table of properties, 221 historical perspective, 178-82
Un systems and, 226-31

Fourier series coefficients

continuous-time, 191, 286

convolution property of, 222

discrete-time, 212, 213

real and imaginary pans of, 216, 217

Fmirier series pair, discrete-tinie, 213

Fourier transform, 180

fast(FFT), 182. 41

geotnetjic evaluation from pole-zero plot, 674-82, 763-67
all-pass systems, 681-82

first-order systems, 676-77,

763-65

second-order systems, 677-81',

765-67

inverse, 284, 288

magnitude-phase represencatirai of,

423-27

Fourier transfomi. continuous-time,

284-357. See also Laplace

transform

analysis equations, 300 fbr aperiodic signal, 285-89 convergence of, 289-90

Dirichlet conditions, 290. 316 even signals. 304

examples of, 290-96 Gibbs phenomenon, 294

imaginary part of, 304 impulse train, 299-300

inversct 284, 288

odd signals, 304

periodic sigtials, 296-300 properties of^ 300-330

conjugation and conjugate symmetry, 303--6
convoludon^ 314-22

di^erentiadon and integration, 306-8

duality, 295,309-11,322

linearity, 301

^

multiplication J 322-27

Parseval's relation^ 312-14

tables of, 328-30

time and frequency scaling, 308-9 time shifting, 301-3

real part of, 304

4

Index
rectangular pulse signal, 293-94 sine functions, 295 symmetric periodic square wave,
397-98 synthesis equation for, 288. 300. 3] two-dimensional, 356-57 of unit impulse, 292
Fourier transform, discrete-time,
35S-422 analysis equation, 361, 390 convefgenc& issues asi^ociated with,
366-67 development of, 359-62 examples of, 362-66 finite-duration signals, 417-18 impulse train, 371-72, 376 periodic signals, 367-72 properties of, 372-90
conjugation and conjugation symmetry, 375
convolution, 3S2-8&
differencing aivd iiccumulation,
375-76 differentiation in frequency, 3S0 duality, 390-96 linearity, 373 muttipli cation, 388-90 Parsevars relation, 380-82 periodicity, 373 table of, 390, 391 time expansion, 377-80 time reversal. 376-77 time shitting and frequency
shifting, 373-75 rectangular pulse, 365-66 synthesis equation, 361, 390 unit impulse, 367 ^-transform and£ 743 Fourier transform pairs, 288 continuous -timet 329 discrece-timc, 361, 392 Frequency (iesJ cairier, 584 cutoff, 237 differentiation in, 380 fundamental, 17-18 instantaneous, 613

947
Nyquisi,519 passband, 237 sampling, 516 stopbaiid, 237 Frequency-division muhiplexing (FDM>,
594-97 Frequency-domain characterization. See
Time-domain and frequency-
dotnain characterization
Frequency response, 227-28 continuous-time delay, 543
continuous-titne ideal band-limited differentiator, 541
discrete-time delay, 543 discrete-time filter, 542 first-urder system, 677 highpass filter, 374-75 lowpass filter, 374--75
discrete-time ideal, 384 ideal, 318 LTl systems, 427-39 LTl systems analysi"; and, 316 open -loop, 821 raised cosine, 629 rational. Bode plots for, 456-60 second-order systems, 677-78, 6S0 Frequency scaling of cOTitinuous-time
Fourier transform, 308-9 Frcquency-selective fiker. 231, 236-39,
318,423 bandpass, 237-38, 326 highpass, 237-38, 241-44,
374-75, 387 ideal, 237-39
time-domain properties of,
439-44 towpass, 237 variable center frequency, 325-27
Frequency -shaping filters, 231, 232-36
differentiating fillers, 232-34, 235 discrete-lime LTl filters, 234-36 Frequency shifting property continuous-time Fourier series, 206 continuous-time Fourier transform,
311, 328 discrete-tiine Fourier series, 221

1

S

946
discrete-time Fourier transform ^
Frequency siiift keying (FSK), 64fi Fundamental components, 187 Fundamcnta] Irequency, 17--18 Fundamental period^ 12
cominuous-dme periodic signal, 186
disciete-iime periodic &i]^niil, 211
Gain, 428 Unear feedback systems, 835, 85S-66 tracking system, 829-30
General complex exponentials, 20-21, 24-25
GeieraliEed functions, 36, 136 Gibbs phenomenon, 200-201, 219, 294 Group delay, 430-36
Half-sample delay, 543-45 Hanning window, 422 Harmonicaliy related complex
exponentials, 19 Harmonic analyzer, 200 Hafmonic components. 187 fleat propagation and diffusion, 180
Higher order holds. 526-27 Highpass filtftr. 237-38
frequency response of, 374-75 ideal bandstop characteristic, 387 /fC 241-44 Hi ghpas s-to-lowpas s
transformations, 49 Hilbert transform, 35 Hold(s)
higher order, 526-27 zero-order, 520-22, 523-26 Homogeneity (scaling) property, 53
Idea] frequency -selective filter, 237-39
dme^omain properties of, 43^-44
Idealization, 67 Identity system. 44
In^i^e processing differentiating filters for, 232-34, 235
phase representation and, 425-27
Imaginar)' part
complex number, 71

Index
Fourier ^rtes coefficients, 216, 217 Impulse response
absolutely integrable, 114 absolutely summable, 113 associated with group delay. 435-36 causal LTl system, 112 continuous-time ideal lowpass
filler, 442 discT^te-tinw ideal lo^vpass filter, 442
first-order discrete-time system,
461-62 ideal lowpass filter, 321-22. 384
second'Order systems, fi77-7R
discrete-time systems, 466-68
Impulse train conti^uous-vime Fourier series of, 208-10 contJnuouR-time Fourier transfyrm of,
299-300
discrete-time Fourier transform of.
371-72, 376 Impulse^train sampling, 5I6-2U, 545-49 Incrementally linear systems, 56 Independent viable, 3-4
transformation of, 7--14 Infinite impulse response (ITR> filters,
123, 476
Infinite sum formula, 73, R9
Infinite Taylor series, 277 Initial -value theorem
Laplace transform, 690-91 ^-transform, 773-74 Instantaneous frequency, 613 Integral, convolution, 90-102 evaluating, 97-102 Integration, in time-domain, 690, 717
Integration property
continuous-time Fourier series, 206
cotitinuauS'tline Fourier transform,
306-8 Integrator, 126-27
Interconnection convolution property and analysis of,
386-87
distributive property of convolution and, 105
feedback, 43

9

1

Index
LTI systems Laplace transform for, 707-8 system functions for, 707-8
^-transform for, 784 parallel. 42-43 IntcrfereTice, intersymhoi, 607-10
5% Iniermediate-frequency (IF) stage,
Interpolation^ 549-55 band-limited, 523-24 linear, 522-23, 526 reconstruction using, 522-27
bitftrsymbol interference (ISI), 607-10 Inverse Fourier transform, 284, 288 Inverse Laplace transfonn, 670-73 Inverse LTI system, 734 Inverse system dosign, 820-21 Inverse systems, 45-46 Inverse ^-transfona 757-63
examples of, 79-92 Inverted pendulum, 8 1 8-1 Invertibility of LTI systems, 109^1
Invertible systems, 45-^46
Lacroix, 5.F, IflO Lag. phase, 4^L-92 Lag network, S90 Lagrange, J.L., 178-79, 180 Laguerre polynomials, 738 Laplace, RS. de, ISO
Laplace transform, 654-740 bilateral, 655, 714 geometric evaluation of, 674-82 all-pass systems, 681-82 first-order systems, 676-77 second-prder systems, 677-81 inverse, 670-73 LTI system analysis and char^terizatiori using, 693-706 causality, 693-95, 697
linearity constant-coefficient
diffcirential equations, 698-700 Stability. 695-98 poles of, 660 poJe-zero pJor of. 660-62, 674 -S 2 properties of, 682-92 conjugation, 6&7
convolution, 687^3

949
differentiation in s domain, 68S--90 differentiation in time-domain, 688 initial- and fieial-value theorems,
690-91 integration in time-domain, 690 linearity. 633-84 ^-domain shifting, 685 table of, 69 1-92 time scaling, 685-87 time shifting, 684 region of convergence for, 657--58,
662-70 left-sided signal, 666, 669 rationa] transform, 669 right-sided signal, 665-66, 669 two-sided signal, 666-68
s-plane representation of, 660,
663-64 as system ftjitctjon, 6y3, 701-13
block diagram representations, 708-13
Butterworth filters, 703^-6 interconnections of LTI systems.
707-^ transform pairs, 692-93 unilateral, 714-20
examples of, 714--16 properties of, 716-19
solving Ji^er^ndal equations using.
719-20 zeros of, 660 Lead, phase, 491-92 Lead netwoA, 890 Left-half plane, 666 Left-sided signal, 666
Linear, time-invariant (LT1> systems,
41, 56, 74-176. See aiso Linear
constant-coefticient difference equations; Linear constantcoefEicient differential equations
bandwidth of, 352-53 causaU 46-48. 112-13. 116-27
block diagram representations for, 124-^27,708-13. 784-89
described by linear constant-
coefficient difference equations,
116, 121-24,396-99

950
described by linear constant-
coefficient differential equations, 116, 117-21
,
real-part sufficiency property
of, 417 continuous-time, 90-102
c on voludtm -integral representation
of, 94-102
described by linear constant-
coefficient differential equations,
330-33 representation in terms of impulses,
90-94 convolution property and, 319-21 discrete-time, 75-90
convolution -sum representation of, 77-90
representation iu terms of impulses,
75-77
feedback. See Linear feedback. systems
filtering with, 231, 234-36 Fourier series and, 226-31 frequency response of, 316
magtiitude -phase representation of,
427-39 mterconnection of
Laplace transform for, 707-S c-transfomi for, 784 inverse, 109-11,734 Laplace transform to analyze and
characterize, 693-706 causality, 693-95,697
linearity constant-coefficient differential equations,
e9a-700 stability, 695-98 with and without memory, 108-9 properties of, 103--8 associative, 1Q7-S commutative, 104 distributive, 104-6 response to complex eiponeotials,
182-86, 226^31 Stability for, 113-15 system functions for interconnections
of, 707-8

hdex
unit impulse response of cascade of two, 107
unit step response of, 115-16 windowing in design of, 420-21 z-transform to analyse and
chaiacterize, 774-83 causality, 776-77 stability, 111-19
Linear constant^oefficicnt difference equations, 116, 121-24, 396-99, 779-81
finite impulse response (FIR) system, 122
infinite impulse response (lER) system, 123
natural responses as solutions to, 122 nonrecursive, 122 recursive, 122, 123 unilateral ^-transfonn to solve,
795-96
Linear constant-coefficient differential cquattons, 116, 117-21, 330-33,
698-700 block diagram representation of,
124-27 initid rest condition, 119-20
natural responses as solutions to, 119, 121
particular and homogeneous solutions to, 118-19
unilateral Laplace transform to Jwlve,
719-20 Linear feedback s>stems, 816-908.
See also Feedback cbsed-loop, 818 gain and phase margin, 835,
858-66
Nyquist stability criterion, 846-58
continuous-time, 850-55 di&crete-time, 856-58 encirclement property, 847-50 open-loop, 818 properties and uses of, 819-20 root-locus analysis of, 832-46 angle cnterion, 836-40 end points, 836

Index
equation for closed-loop poles,
834-36 properties of£ 841--46 samplcd-data, B26-2S Linear interpolation, 522-23, 526 Linearity, 53-56
Linearity property continiu>u$-time Fourier serits,
202, 206
continuous-time Fourier tiansform, 301
discrete- time Fourier series, 221 discrete-time Fourier transfomi^ 373
Laplace transfonn, 683-84 unilateral, 717
i-trans form, 767 unilateral, 793
Log magniiudc-pha&c diagram, 861-62, 864-66
Log-magniUide plots, 436-39 Lossless coding, 46 Lowpass filters, 237
frequency respense of, 574-75
ideal
cotttinuous-tirac, 440, 442, 443 discrete-time, 384, 442, 443 frequency response of, 318 impalse responses ot 321-22,
384,442 step respense of, 443 ifC, 239-41
Lowpass-to-highpass tjausformations, 498
LTI, See Linear, (ime-invariant (LTI) systems
M^nitude of compbx number, 71
Magnitude-phase representation Fourier tratisfomi, 423-27 frequency response of LTI systems, 427-39 group delay, 430-36 linear and nonlinear pha^e* 428-30 log-magnitude and fiode plots, 436-39
Mass-spring-d£slipet mechanical
system, 824

951
Matched filter, 170-72, 275 Measuring devices, imperfect, 355-56 Memory* LTI systems with and without,
108-9 Mcmoryless systems, 44 Michelson, Albert, 200 Modulating signal, 583 Moduladodi. S^e also Sinusoidal
amplitude modulation anglt, 611-13 defined, 582 discrete-time, 619-23 double-sideband (DSB), 598 percent, 591 phase, 611-13
pulse-amplitude, 604-10 digital, 610 intersymbol interference in, 607-10
pulse-code^ 610 sinusoidal frequency, 583, 611--19
narrowband, 613-15 periodic square-wave modulating
signal, 617-19 wideband, 615-17 Modulation index, 591, 614 Modulation property^ 323. See also
Multiplication property
Monge, G,, 180
Moving-average filters, 245-47. 476-82
Multiplexing defined, 583
frequency-division (FDM), 594-97 quadrature^ 646 time-division (TDM), 604, 605
Multiplication property continuous time Fourier series,
204,206
continuous-tiine Fourier tran&fonn,
322-27 discrete-time Fourier series, 221. 222
discrete-time Fourier transform,
3&&-90 Multiplicities, 155
Narrowband frequetbcy modulation, 613-15
Natural frequency, undamped, 452-53

952
Mamral responses, 119, 121, 122 Negative (de gene rative) feedback, 822,
831-32 Networks, lag and lead, ft90 Nonanticipative system, 46--47 Noncausal averaging system, 47 Nonidea] filters, time-domain
aitd ftequ^ncy -domain
characterizaiion of, 444-47 Nonrecursive filters. See Finite impulse
response (FIR) fiUers Noniecxirsive linear constant -coeffideni
difference equations, 122 iSronnalized functions, 273
Nyquist frequency, 519 Nyquist plots, 853-58 Nyquist rale, 519, 556 Kyquist stability criterion, B46-58
oontinuous-time, 850-^55
discrete-time, 856-53 encirclement property. S47-50
Odd haimatiic continuous-time periodic
signal, 262
Odd signals, 13-14
contimi&us-time Fourier series,
206 discrete-lime Fourier series, 221 Open -loop systetn, SI 8 Open-loop frequency response, 821 Operational amplifiers, 821, 896-97 Orthogonal functions, 273-75 Orthogonal signals, 280-*! Orthonomial functions, 273-75 OrthonOFmal signals, 280^81 Oscilloscope* sampling, 534 Overdamped system, 453 Oversamplingn 529 Overshoot, 454
Paiallel-form block diagratrvs, 712, 713,
7S7-&9 Parallei interconnection, 42-43 Panty check, 610
Parseval's relation continuous-time Fourier transform,
312-14

lnde}<
continuous-time Fourier series,
205, 206
discrete-time Fourier transform,
380-S2 discrete time Fourier series, 223 Partial-fraction expansion, 909-20 continuous-time signals and systems
and. 910-16 discrete-time signals and svstems and,
916-20 Passband edge, 445 Passband frequency, 237 Passband ripple, 445 Pendulum, inverted, 81 R-19
Percent modulation, 591 Period, sampling, 516 Periodic complex exponentials,
16-20, 186 Periodic convolution, 222, 389-90
continuous-time Fourier series, 206 discrete-time Fourier series, 221 Periodicity pfoperiy of discrete-time
Fourier transform, 373 Periodic signals, 11-13. See also
Fourier transform; Fourier series;
Periodic complex exponentials;
Sinusoidal signals continuous-time. 12 discrete-time, 12
power of, 312 Periodic square wave
conUnuous-lime, 193-95, 2OO-201, 209, 218-1?, 285-86, 297-98
discrete-time, 219-20. 224
Periodic train of impulses continuous-time Fourier series of,
208-10
continuous-time Fourier transform of,
299-300
discrete-time Fourier [ransfoim of,
371-72,376 Periodic signal, odd-harmonic, 262 Phase (angle) of complex number, 71 Phase lag, 493-92 Phase lead, 491-92 Phase margin in linear feedback systems,
858^66

\ntiex
Phase modulations 611-13 Phase /eversal, 532 Phase shift, 42S, 636 Plant, 828 Polar fonn for complex number. 71
Poles
clflsed-loop, &34-36 LapJate traasfoimH 660
Polt-zero plot(s)
all-pass systems, 682 iirst-otder sysie-ins, 676-77, 763--65 Laplace transforms, 660-62, 674-S2
second-order systems, 678-80. 765''67
È-trarisfonn, 763-67 Polynotnials, Laguerre, 73& PopaUtion dynamics^ feedback model of£
824-26
Positive (regenerative) feedback,
S3i-32 Power of signals, 5-7, 312 Power-series ffltparision method, 761-63 Principal -phase function, 433, 434 Proportional feedback system, 823-24 Prcponional (P) contr&l, 905
Proportional -plus- derivative
feedback, 824
Prcponional-plus- integral (PI) control, 905
Prcportional -plus- integral -pi us-
differeniial (PID> control, 905 Pulse-amplitude modulation, 6IH-10
digital. 610 intersymbol interference in, 607-10 PuJse-code nicrfulation, 6^0 Pulse-train carrier, 601-4, 605
Quadrature distortion, 636 Quadrature multiplexing, 646 Quality of circuit, 456
Raised cosine frequency response. 629 Rational frequency responses. Bode plots
for, 456-60
RC hjghpass filter, 241-44
ftC lowpass filter, 239-41 Real exponential signals, 15, 22, 23

953
Real part complex number, 71 Fourier series coefficients, 216, 217
Real-part sufficiency, 350£ 417 Rectangular (Cartesian) form for
complex number, 71 Rectangular pul^
contmuous-dme, 293-94 discrete-time, 365-66 Rectangular window,-420 Recursive (infinite impulse response)
filters, 123,476
Recursive linsar constanl-coeffii-ienJ difference equations, 122^ 123
Regencirative (positive) feedback,
831^32 Region of convergence
Laplace transform, 657-58, 662-70 left-sided signai, 666, 669 rational transfonn, 669 light-sided signal, 665-66, 669 two-sided signal, 666-- 6S
^-transform, 743-44, 74&-57 bounded by poles or infinity, 756 centered about origin, 748-49 finite -duration sequence, 749-50 left-sided sequence, 751, 752 right- sided sequence, 750-^51, 752 two-sitied sequence, 751-53
Right-half plane, 666 Right-sided signal, 665-66 Ringings 443, 454 Rise time, 352-53, 444 Root-locus analysis, S32-46
angle criterion, 836-40 end points, 836 equation for closed-loop poles, 834-36
properties of, fi4l-46
Running sum of discrete-time Fourier
sene$, 221
Sampled-data feedback systems,
826-28 Sampling, 29, 39,514-Sl
aliasing, 527-34 bandpass signal. 564-65 continuous-time signals, 4

S

954
discrete-time processing of c^ontinuous-dnrie signals,
534-45 digital differentiator, 541-43 half-sample dSlay, 543--45 discrete-time signals, 545-55
decimation and interpolation, 549-55
impuSse train, 545-49 impulse-train, 516-20, 545-49
recoEiAtruction u^ing interpoLation,
with zero-order hold, 520-22. 523-26 Sampling frcQuency, 516 Sampling function, 516 Sannpling osdlloscope, 534 Sampling peritxt, 516
Sampliiig property of continuous-time impulse^ 35
Sampling theorem^ 514-15, 51 Scaling (homogeneity) property, 53 Scaling in 7, domain, 76S-69, 793 Scrambler, speech, 633-34
Second harmomc coniponents, 187
Second-order continuous-time systems,
451-56
Second-order discretft-time systems,
465-72 Series (cascade) interconnection, 42
Shifting property
s-domain, 717 tinilateral z transforrn, 794-95 SiAing property continuous-time impulse, 90-92 discrete-time unit impulse, 77 Signal(*|, 1-3S. See also Periodic signals cotidnubus-titne and discrete-tinier
1-7
energy acid power of, 5-7 examples and mathematical
representation of, 1-5 sampling of, 4, 5^5-55 exponential and sinu&oida],
14-30, 186 continuous-time complex, 15-21 discrete-time complex, 21-30 realn 22, 23

Index
transforraatton of independent variabJe, 7-14
examples of, 8-11 unit impulse and unit step functions^
30-3& continuous-time, 32-38 discrete^time, 30-32 Sine functions, 295 Single-sideband sinusoidal amplitude
modulation, 597-601
Singularity funcdons, 36, 67^ 127-36. See also Linit impulse
Sinusoidal amplitude modulation, 583-^S7
complex exponential cairier, 583-S5
demodulaLion for, 587-94 asynchronous, 590-94 sj'nchronous, 587-90
discrete-time, 619-23
frequency-division multiplexing
(FDM> using, 594-97
single-sideband, 597-601 with sinusoidal carrier, 5B5--37
Sinusoidal frequency modulation, 583^
611-19 narrowband, 613-15 periodic S()uare-wave modulating
signal, 617^19 wideband, 615-17 Sinusoidal signals, 14-30, 186 continuous-time complex, 15-21 djscrete-tinte, 24 discrete-time complex, 21-30 real, 22, 23 Sinusoids, damped, 21 Sliding, 85 Spectral coefficient. See Fourier series
coefficients
Spectrum, 28&, 361. See aiso Foarier transfonn
enei^y-density, 312, 349, 381
Speech scrantbler, 633-34 Square wave, periodic
continuous-time. 193-95, 200-201, 209, 218-19, 285-86, 297-98
discrete-time, 219-20, 224

3

Index
Stability, 4&-50 feedback svstems, 85&-66 LTl systems, 113-15, 695-98, 777-79
Stabilization with feedback, 823-26 Step-invariant tiansfoniiation, 828, 908 Step respOTise> 115-16
automotive suspension system, 476
contLnuous-time ideal lowpaes filter, 443
discrete-time i<ieal lowpass filter, 443
first'Oird^r discrete-time system*
461,463
secord-order discrete-tiine systems, 466, .468
Stopband edge, 445 Stopband frequency, 237 Stopband ripple, 445
Stroboscopic effect^ 533-'34
Stiffidency, real-part, 350, 417 Summer, 44 Supoiposition integral. See Convolution
integral
Superposition property, 53
Superposition sum. See Convolution sum Suspension system, analysis of, 473-76
Symmetry, conjugate, 204-5, 206, 221, 303-6, 375
SyndiesU equation continuous'tinw Fourier series, 191 continuous-dme Fourier transform, 288, 300, 314 discrete-dme Fourier series, 213 discrete-time Fomier transform, 361, 390
System function(s), 227 closed-loop, 820 feedback path, 820 forward path, 820
interconnections of LTl systems, 707-8
Laplace transform as, 693, 701-13 block diagram representacions, 708^13 Butterworth filters, 703-6 interconnections of LTl systems, 707^8

955
^-transform as, 781-89 block diagram representations. 784-89 interconnection of LTl systems, 784
Systems, 3S-56 continuooS'time and discrete-dme, 3S-43 examples of, 39-41 firet-order, 448^51. 461-65 intercoiuiections of, 41-43 second-order, 451-56, 465-72 properties of, 44-56 causality, 46-48 invertible and inverse, 45-46 lirkearity, 53-56 memory and menwryless, 44-45 stability, 4S-50 time-invariajice^ 50-53
Taylor series, infinite, 277 Telescope^ angular position of, 816-18
Time, 3-4 Htne advance property of unilateral
^-transform, 793 Time constant, 448
dominant, 500-501 Time delay property of uuiiateral
z-transform, 793 Time-divl&ion mu]tiple::ting (TDM),
604,605 Time-domain atid frequency-domain
characterization, 423-5 1 condnuous-time systems, 443-60
Bode plots for rational frequency responses and, 456-60
first-order, 448-51 second-order. 451-56 discrete-time systems, 461-72 first-order^ 461--65 second-order. 465-72 examples of, 472-82 automobile suspension system,
473-76
discrete-time nonrecursive filteTi
476-82
magnitude-phase rcprescntadon Founer transform, 423-27

956

frequency response of LTl systems,

427-39

nonideal filLcrs, 444-47

Time expansion property

discrete-time Fourier series 2?'

discrete-time Foun

^oTm

^-transform, 769-70 unilateraL 793
Time invATiance, 50-53, 77 Time reveryal property, K
continuous-tinie Fourier series,
203, 206
continuous- lime Fourier transform, 309
dLscrete-dme Fourier series, 221 discrete-time Fourier transfomi,
376^77 Laplace transtorrvT, 687 ^'transform, 769 Time scaling property, 8, 9, 10
continuous-time Fouriei series,
204,206
coniinuous-time Fourier transform,
30S^9
discrete-time Fourier series, 221 discrete-rime Fourier transfomi,
377-80 iLaplace transform, 685-S7
unilateral, 717 ^-transform, 769-70
unilateral, 793 Time shifting properly, 8-9. 10
continuous-time Fourier series,
202-3, 206 <;&ntinutius-time Fourier minsformH
301-3
discrete-time Fourier series, 221 <i]screte-tiTne Fourier trajisfonn,
375-75 Laplace tran&form, 6S4 ^-trajisform, 767-68 Time window^ 420 Tracking systems, 828-30 Transfer function. See System
functioTif^)

Index
Transformation
bilinear, 814-15 highpass-to-lowpass, 498 of independent variable, 7-14 !owpass-tn-highpass, 498
itep-invariam, ^8, 908
Transition band, 445 Trans nwdulation (transrauitiplexiug),
discrete- time, 62^, 624 Triangular (Bartlett) window, 421 TVigoitometric series, 173-79 Two-sided signal, 666-68 Type / feedb^k system, 906
Undamped namral frequency, 452-53 Undamped system, 454 Underdamped systems, 467
Undersampling, 527-34 Unilateral Laplace transform, 714-20
examples of, 714-16 propemes of, 716-19
solving differential equations using,
719^20 Unilateral ^-transform, 742, 789-96
examples of, 79-92 properties of, 792-95
solving difference equations using,
795-96 Unit circle, 743 Unit delay. 125 Unit doublets, 132-^36, 172 Unit impulse, 30-3S
cascade of two LTI systems and, 107 continuous-time, 32-38. 127-36, 292
Jctining through convolution, 131-32
as idealized short pulse, 128-31 sifting property of, 9^-92 discrete- time, 30-32, 3^7 sifting property of, 77 icprestintaiion of continuous-time LTl
systems in terms of. 90-94 representation of discrete tirae LTl
systems in tenuis of, 75-77 Untt impulse respoase, discrete- time,
77--90, Se& also In'ipjlse response

]i>dex
Unit ramp function, 135 Unit step functions, 30-38
contiriuous-time> 32-38 discrete-time, 30-32 Utvit step response of LTI systems,
115-16 Unstable systems, feedback to stabilize,
823-26 Unwrapped phase, 433, 434 Upsampling, 552, 553
Variable, independent, 3-4 transfoimatioti of, 7-1+
Walsh functions, 170, 27& Wave, square. 5^^ Periodic square wave Wavelengths, ISl Weighted average, 245 Witieband frequency modulation,
615-17 Windowing, 420-22
Zero-force equalizer, 649 Zero-input response, 55-56, 720 Zero-order h(jld, 520-22, 523-26 Zeros of Laplace transform, 660 Zeni-state response, 720 z-transfomij 741-815
bilateral, 742, 769 defined, 742
discrete-time Fourier transform
and, 743 georTjetric evaluation of, 763- 67
first-order systemsj 763-65 second-order systems, 765--67 invtiree, 757--63 examples of, 79-92

957
LTT systems analysis and characterization usingj 774-83
causality, 776-77
linear constant-coefficient
difference equations, 779-^1 stability, 777-79 pole-zero plot, 763-67 properties of, 767-74 conjugation, 770 convolution, 770-72 differentiation in ^-domain^ 772 initial- value theorem, 773-74 linearity, 767 scaling iti i-doraain, 76S-69 table of, 775 time expansion, 769-70 time reversal, 769 time shifting, 767^68 region of convergence for, 743-44,
748-57 bounded by poles or infinity, 756 centered about origin, 748--49 finite-duration sequence, 749-50 lef^-sided sequence, 751, 752 right-sided sequence, 750-51 , 752 two-^ided sequence, 751-53 syst&m functions, 78t-89 block diagram representation s£
784-89
f&r intercofinection f>f UTI systems^ 784
unilateral, 742, 789-96 ejtamples <jf, 79-93 properties of, 792-95
solving difference equations using,
795-96 z-tr^nsform pairs, 774, 776

]i>dex
Unit ramp function, 135 Unit step functions, 30-38
contiriuous-time> 32-38 discrete-time, 30-32 Utvit step response of LTI systems,
115-16 Unstable systems, feedback to stabilize,
823-26 Unwrapped phase, 433, 434 Upsampling, 552, 553
Variable, independent, 3-4 transfoimatioti of, 7-1+
Walsh functions, 170, 27& Wave, square. 5^^ Periodic square wave Wavelengths, ISl Weighted average, 245 Witieband frequency modulation,
615-17 Windowing, 420-22
Zero-force equalizer, 649 Zero-input response, 55-56, 720 Zero-order h(jld, 520-22, 523-26 Zeros of Laplace transform, 660 Zeni-state response, 720 z-transfomij 741-815
bilateral, 742, 769 defined, 742
discrete-time Fourier transform
and, 743 georTjetric evaluation of, 763- 67
first-order systemsj 763-65 second-order systems, 765--67 invtiree, 757--63 examples of, 79-92

957
LTT systems analysis and characterization usingj 774-83
causality, 776-77
linear constant-coefficient
difference equations, 779-^1 stability, 777-79 pole-zero plot, 763-67 properties of, 767-74 conjugation, 770 convolution, 770-72 differentiation in ^-domain^ 772 initial- value theorem, 773-74 linearity, 767 scaling iti i-doraain, 76S-69 table of, 775 time expansion, 769-70 time reversal, 769 time shifting, 767^68 region of convergence for, 743-44,
748-57 bounded by poles or infinity, 756 centered about origin, 748--49 finite-duration sequence, 749-50 lef^-sided sequence, 751, 752 right-sided sequence, 750-51 , 752 two-^ided sequence, 751-53 syst&m functions, 78t-89 block diagram representation s£
784-89
f&r intercofinection f>f UTI systems^ 784
unilateral, 742, 789-96 ejtamples <jf, 79-93 properties of, 792-95
solving difference equations using,
795-96 z-tr^nsform pairs, 774, 776

]i>dex
Unit ramp function, 135 Unit step functions, 30-38
contiriuous-time> 32-38 discrete-time, 30-32 Utvit step response of LTI systems,
115-16 Unstable systems, feedback to stabilize,
823-26 Unwrapped phase, 433, 434 Upsampling, 552, 553
Variable, independent, 3-4 transfoimatioti of, 7-1+
Walsh functions, 170, 27& Wave, square. 5^^ Periodic square wave Wavelengths, ISl Weighted average, 245 Witieband frequency modulation,
615-17 Windowing, 420-22
Zero-force equalizer, 649 Zero-input response, 55-56, 720 Zero-order h(jld, 520-22, 523-26 Zeros of Laplace transform, 660 Zeni-state response, 720 z-transfomij 741-815
bilateral, 742, 769 defined, 742
discrete-time Fourier transform
and, 743 georTjetric evaluation of, 763- 67
first-order systemsj 763-65 second-order systems, 765--67 invtiree, 757--63 examples of, 79-92

957
LTT systems analysis and characterization usingj 774-83
causality, 776-77
linear constant-coefficient
difference equations, 779-^1 stability, 777-79 pole-zero plot, 763-67 properties of, 767-74 conjugation, 770 convolution, 770-72 differentiation in ^-domain^ 772 initial- value theorem, 773-74 linearity, 767 scaling iti i-doraain, 76S-69 table of, 775 time expansion, 769-70 time reversal, 769 time shifting, 767^68 region of convergence for, 743-44,
748-57 bounded by poles or infinity, 756 centered about origin, 748--49 finite-duration sequence, 749-50 lef^-sided sequence, 751, 752 right-sided sequence, 750-51 , 752 two-^ided sequence, 751-53 syst&m functions, 78t-89 block diagram representation s£
784-89
f&r intercofinection f>f UTI systems^ 784
unilateral, 742, 789-96 ejtamples <jf, 79-93 properties of, 792-95
solving difference equations using,
795-96 z-tr^nsform pairs, 774, 776

